VOLUME ONE
Chapter 1. Marseilles—The Arrival
Chapter 2. Father and Son
Chapter 3. The Catalans
Chapter 4. Conspiracy
Chapter 5. The Marriage Feast
Chapter 6. The Deputy Procureur du Roi
Chapter 7. The Examination
Chapter 8. The Château d’If
Chapter 9. The Evening of the Betrothal
Chapter 10. The King’s Closet at the Tuileries
Chapter 11. The Corsican Ogre
Chapter 12. Father and Son
Chapter 13. The Hundred Days
Chapter 14. The Two Prisoners
Chapter 15. Number 34 and Number 27
Chapter 16. A Learned Italian
Chapter 17. The Abbé’s Chamber
Chapter 18. The Treasure
Chapter 19. The Third Attack
Chapter 20. The Cemetery of the Château d’If
Chapter 21. The Island of Tiboulen
Chapter 22. The Smugglers
Chapter 23. The Island of Monte Cristo
Chapter 24. The Secret Cave
Chapter 25. The Unknown
Chapter 26. The Pont du Gard Inn
Chapter 27. The Story

“Yes; we have an instance here; it was by always offering a million of
francs to the governor for his liberty that an abbé became mad, who was
in this chamber before you.”

“Listen!” said Dantès. “I am not an abbé, I am not mad; perhaps I shall
be, but at present, unfortunately, I am not. I will make you another
offer.”

“Threats!” cried the jailer, retreating and putting himself on the
defensive; “you are certainly going mad. The abbé began like you, and
in three days you will be like him, mad enough to tie up; but,
fortunately, there are dungeons here.”

“You are right, sir,” replied the governor; “and this remark proves
that you have deeply considered the subject. Now we have in a dungeon
about twenty feet distant, and to which you descend by another stair,
an old abbé, formerly leader of a party in Italy, who has been here
since 1811, and in 1813 he went mad, and the change is astonishing. He
used to weep, he now laughs; he grew thin, he now grows fat. You had
better see him, for his madness is amusing.”

“I, monsieur,” replied the abbé with an air of surprise,—“I want
nothing.”

“Oh, that is different,” cried the abbé; “and we shall understand each
other, I hope.”

“Monsieur,” continued the prisoner, “I am the Abbé Faria, born at Rome.
I was for twenty years Cardinal Spada’s secretary; I was arrested, why,
I know not, toward the beginning of the year 1811; since then I have
demanded my liberty from the Italian and French government.”

“My information dates from the day on which I was arrested,” returned
the Abbé Faria; “and as the emperor had created the kingdom of Rome for
his infant son, I presume that he has realized the dream of Machiavelli
and Cæsar Borgia, which was to make Italy a united kingdom.”

“It is for that reason I am delighted to see you,” continued the abbé,
“although you have disturbed me in a most important calculation, which,
if it succeeded, would possibly change Newton’s system. Could you allow
me a few words in private.”

“What you ask is impossible, monsieur,” continued he, addressing Faria.

“But,” said the abbé, “I would speak to you of a large sum, amounting
to five millions.”

“However,” continued Faria, seeing that the inspector was about to
depart, “it is not absolutely necessary for us to be alone; the
governor can be present.”

“Unfortunately,” said the governor, “I know beforehand what you are
about to say; it concerns your treasures, does it not?” Faria fixed his
eyes on him with an expression that would have convinced anyone else of
his sanity.

“That proves,” returned the abbé, “that you are like those of Holy
Writ, who having eyes see not, and having ears hear not.”

“My dear sir, the government is rich and does not want your treasures,”
replied the inspector; “keep them until you are liberated.” The abbé’s
eyes glistened; he seized the inspector’s hand.

“I am not mad,” replied Faria, with that acuteness of hearing peculiar
to prisoners. “The treasure I speak of really exists, and I offer to
sign an agreement with you, in which I promise to lead you to the spot
where you shall dig; and if I deceive you, bring me here again,—I ask
no more.”

“The scheme is well known,” said the inspector; “and the abbé’s plan
has not even the merit of originality.”

Then turning to Faria, “I inquired if you are well fed?” said he.

“Swear to me,” replied Faria, “to free me if what I tell you prove
true, and I will stay here while you go to the spot.”

“Nor you to mine,” cried the abbé. “You will not accept my gold; I will
keep it for myself. You refuse me my liberty; God will give it me.” And
the abbé, casting away his coverlet, resumed his place, and continued
his calculations.

Faria replied to this sarcasm with a glance of profound contempt. They
went out. The turnkey closed the door behind them.

So the matter ended for the Abbé Faria. He remained in his cell, and
this visit only increased the belief in his insanity.

It has always been against the policy of despotic governments to suffer
the victims of their persecutions to reappear. As the Inquisition
rarely allowed its victims to be seen with their limbs distorted and
their flesh lacerated by torture, so madness is always concealed in its
cell, from whence, should it depart, it is conveyed to some gloomy
hospital, where the doctor has no thought for man or mind in the
mutilated being the jailer delivers to him. The very madness of the
Abbé Faria, gone mad in prison, condemned him to perpetual captivity.

He besought the jailer one day to let him have a companion, were it
even the mad abbé. The jailer, though rough and hardened by the
constant sight of so much suffering, was yet a man. At the bottom of
his heart he had often had a feeling of pity for this unhappy young man
who suffered so; and he laid the request of number 34 before the
governor; but the latter sapiently imagined that Dantès wished to
conspire or attempt an escape, and refused his request. Dantès had
exhausted all human resources, and he then turned to God.

The stranger smiled a melancholy smile. “Then listen,” said he. “I am
the Abbé Faria, and have been imprisoned as you know in this Château
d’If since the year 1811; previously to which I had been confined for
three years in the fortress of Fenestrelle. In the year 1811 I was
transferred to Piedmont in France. It was at this period I learned that
the destiny which seemed subservient to every wish formed by Napoleon,
had bestowed on him a son, named king of Rome even in his cradle. I was
very far then from expecting the change you have just informed me of;
namely, that four years afterwards, this colossus of power would be
overthrown. Then who reigns in France at this moment—Napoleon II.?”

“Yes, yes,” continued he, “’Twill be the same as it was in England.
After Charles I., Cromwell; after Cromwell, Charles II., and then James
II., and then some son-in-law or relation, some Prince of Orange, a
stadtholder who becomes a king. Then new concessions to the people,
then a constitution, then liberty. Ah, my friend!” said the abbé,
turning towards Dantès, and surveying him with the kindling gaze of a
prophet, “you are young, you will see all this come to pass.”

“True,” replied Faria, “we are prisoners; but I forget this sometimes,
and there are even moments when my mental vision transports me beyond
these walls, and I fancy myself at liberty.”

“Well, then,” resumed Faria with a bitter smile, “let me answer your
question in full, by acknowledging that I am the poor mad prisoner of
the Château d’If, for many years permitted to amuse the different
visitors with what is said to be my insanity; and, in all probability,
I should be promoted to the honor of making sport for the children, if
such innocent beings could be found in an abode devoted like this to
suffering and despair.”

Dantès held down his head, that the other might not see how joy at the
thought of having a companion outweighed the sympathy he felt for the
failure of the abbé’s plans.

The abbé sank upon Edmond’s bed, while Edmond himself remained
standing. Escape had never once occurred to him. There are, indeed,
some things which appear so impossible that the mind does not dwell on
them for an instant. To undermine the ground for fifty feet—to devote
three years to a labor which, if successful, would conduct you to a
precipice overhanging the sea—to plunge into the waves from the height
of fifty, sixty, perhaps a hundred feet, at the risk of being dashed to
pieces against the rocks, should you have been fortunate enough to have
escaped the fire of the sentinels; and even, supposing all these perils
past, then to have to swim for your life a distance of at least three
miles ere you could reach the shore—were difficulties so startling and
formidable that Dantès had never even dreamed of such a scheme,
resigning himself rather to death.

But the sight of an old man clinging to life with so desperate a
courage, gave a fresh turn to his ideas, and inspired him with new
courage. Another, older and less strong than he, had attempted what he
had not had sufficient resolution to undertake, and had failed only
because of an error in calculation. This same person, with almost
incredible patience and perseverance, had contrived to provide himself
with tools requisite for so unparalleled an attempt. Another had done
all this; why, then, was it impossible to Dantès? Faria had dug his way
through fifty feet, Dantès would dig a hundred; Faria, at the age of
fifty, had devoted three years to the task; he, who was but half as
old, would sacrifice six; Faria, a priest and savant, had not shrunk
from the idea of risking his life by trying to swim a distance of three
miles to one of the islands—Daume, Rattonneau, or Lemaire; should a
hardy sailor, an experienced diver, like himself, shrink from a similar
task; should he, who had so often for mere amusement’s sake plunged to
the bottom of the sea to fetch up the bright coral branch, hesitate to
entertain the same project? He could do it in an hour, and how many
times had he, for pure pastime, continued in the water for more than
twice as long! At once Dantès resolved to follow the brave example of
his energetic companion, and to remember that what has once been done
may be done again.

Faria started: “Have you, indeed?” cried he, raising his head with
quick anxiety; “pray, let me know what it is you have discovered?”

“One instant, my dear friend,” replied the abbé; “it is clear you do
not understand the nature of the courage with which I am endowed, and
what use I intend making of my strength. As for patience, I consider
that I have abundantly exercised that in beginning every morning the
task of the night before, and every night renewing the task of the day.
But then, young man (and I pray of you to give me your full attention),
then I thought I could not be doing anything displeasing to the
Almighty in trying to set an innocent being at liberty—one who had
committed no offence, and merited not condemnation.”

“Tell me,” replied Faria, “what has hindered you from knocking down
your jailer with a piece of wood torn from your bedstead, dressing
yourself in his clothes, and endeavoring to escape?”

“Since my imprisonment,” said Faria, “I have thought over all the most
celebrated cases of escape on record. They have rarely been successful.
Those that have been crowned with full success have been long meditated
upon, and carefully arranged; such, for instance, as the escape of the
Duc de Beaufort from the Château de Vincennes, that of the Abbé
Dubuquoi from For l’Evêque; of Latude from the Bastille. Then there are
those for which chance sometimes affords opportunity, and those are the
best of all. Let us, therefore, wait patiently for some favorable
moment, and when it presents itself, profit by it.”

“Oh, no,” answered the abbé; “I had none but what I made for myself.”

Dantès gazed with admiration, but he had some difficulty in believing.
Faria saw this.

“There was formerly a fireplace in my dungeon,” replied Faria, “but it
was closed up long ere I became an occupant of this prison. Still, it
must have been many years in use, for it was thickly covered with a
coating of soot; this soot I dissolved in a portion of the wine brought
to me every Sunday, and I assure you a better ink cannot be desired.
For very important notes, for which closer attention is required, I
pricked one of my fingers, and wrote with my own blood.”

“Whenever you please,” replied the abbé.

“Follow me, then,” said the abbé, as he re-entered the subterranean
passage, in which he soon disappeared, followed by Dantès.

Chapter 17. The Abbé’s Chamber

After having passed with tolerable ease through the subterranean
passage, which, however, did not admit of their holding themselves
erect, the two friends reached the further end of the corridor, into
which the abbé’s cell opened; from that point the passage became much
narrower, and barely permitted one to creep through on hands and knees.
The floor of the abbé’s cell was paved, and it had been by raising one
of the stones in the most obscure corner that Faria had been able to
commence the laborious task of which Dantès had witnessed the
completion.

“It is well,” said the abbé; “we have some hours before us—it is now
just a quarter past twelve o’clock.” Instinctively Dantès turned round
to observe by what watch or clock the abbé had been able so accurately
to specify the hour.

“Look at this ray of light which enters by my window,” said the abbé,
“and then observe the lines traced on the wall. Well, by means of these
lines, which are in accordance with the double motion of the earth, and
the ellipse it describes round the sun, I am enabled to ascertain the
precise hour with more minuteness than if I possessed a watch; for that
might be broken or deranged in its movements, while the sun and earth
never vary in their appointed paths.”

“Come,” said he to the abbé, “I am anxious to see your treasures.”

The abbé smiled, and, proceeding to the disused fireplace, raised, by
the help of his chisel, a long stone, which had doubtless been the
hearth, beneath which was a cavity of considerable depth, serving as a
safe depository of the articles mentioned to Dantès.

“What do you wish to see first?” asked the abbé.

Faria then drew forth from his hiding-place three or four rolls of
linen, laid one over the other, like folds of papyrus. These rolls
consisted of slips of cloth about four inches wide and eighteen long;
they were all carefully numbered and closely covered with writing, so
legible that Dantès could easily read it, as well as make out the
sense—it being in Italian, a language he, as a Provençal, perfectly
understood.

“Look!” said Faria, showing to the young man a slender stick about six
inches long, and much resembling the size of the handle of a fine
painting-brush, to the end of which was tied, by a piece of thread, one
of those cartilages of which the abbé had before spoken to Dantès; it
was pointed, and divided at the nib like an ordinary pen. Dantès
examined it with intense admiration, then looked around to see the
instrument with which it had been shaped so correctly into form.

“Ah, yes,” said Faria; “the penknife. That’s my masterpiece. I made it,
as well as this larger knife, out of an old iron candlestick.” The
penknife was sharp and keen as a razor; as for the other knife, it
would serve a double purpose, and with it one could cut and thrust.

“As for the ink,” said Faria, “I told you how I managed to obtain
that—and I only just make it from time to time, as I require it.”

“I worked at night also,” replied Faria.

“I separated the fat from the meat served to me, melted it, and so made
oil—here is my lamp.” So saying, the abbé exhibited a sort of torch
very similar to those used in public illuminations.

Dantès laid the different things he had been looking at on the table,
and stood with his head drooping on his breast, as though overwhelmed
by the perseverance and strength of Faria’s mind.

“You have not seen all yet,” continued Faria, “for I did not think it
wise to trust all my treasures in the same hiding-place. Let us shut
this one up.” They put the stone back in its place; the abbé sprinkled
a little dust over it to conceal the traces of its having been removed,
rubbed his foot well on it to make it assume the same appearance as the
other, and then, going towards his bed, he removed it from the spot it
stood in. Behind the head of the bed, and concealed by a stone fitting
in so closely as to defy all suspicion, was a hollow space, and in this
space a ladder of cords between twenty-five and thirty feet in length.
Dantès closely and eagerly examined it; he found it firm, solid, and
compact enough to bear any weight.

“With this needle,” said the abbé, as, opening his ragged vestments, he
showed Dantès a long, sharp fish-bone, with a small perforated eye for
the thread, a small portion of which still remained in it.

“I once thought,” continued Faria, “of removing these iron bars, and
letting myself down from the window, which, as you see, is somewhat
wider than yours, although I should have enlarged it still more
preparatory to my flight; however, I discovered that I should merely
have dropped into a sort of inner court, and I therefore renounced the
project altogether as too full of risk and danger. Nevertheless, I
carefully preserved my ladder against one of those unforeseen
opportunities of which I spoke just now, and which sudden chance
frequently brings about.”

While affecting to be deeply engaged in examining the ladder, the mind
of Dantès was, in fact, busily occupied by the idea that a person so
intelligent, ingenious, and clear-sighted as the abbé might probably be
able to solve the dark mystery of his own misfortunes, where he himself
could see nothing.

“What are you thinking of?” asked the abbé smilingly, imputing the deep
abstraction in which his visitor was plunged to the excess of his awe
and wonder.

The abbé smiled. “Well,” said he, “but you had another subject for your
thoughts; did you not say so just now?”

“Come,” said the abbé, closing his hiding-place, and pushing the bed
back to its original situation, “let me hear your story.”

Dantès obeyed, and commenced what he called his history, but which
consisted only of the account of a voyage to India, and two or three
voyages to the Levant, until he arrived at the recital of his last
cruise, with the death of Captain Leclere, and the receipt of a packet
to be delivered by himself to the grand marshal; his interview with
that personage, and his receiving, in place of the packet brought, a
letter addressed to a Monsieur Noirtier—his arrival at Marseilles, and
interview with his father—his affection for Mercédès, and their nuptial
feast—his arrest and subsequent examination, his temporary detention at
the Palais de Justice, and his final imprisonment in the Château d’If.
From this point everything was a blank to Dantès—he knew nothing more,
not even the length of time he had been imprisoned. His recital
finished, the abbé reflected long and earnestly.

“That’s better,” cried the abbé; “now we are on the right scent. Did
you take anybody with you when you put into the port of Elba?”

The abbé shrugged his shoulders. “The thing is clear as day,” said he;
“and you must have had a very confiding nature, as well as a good
heart, not to have suspected the origin of the whole affair.”

Again the abbé smiled. “Disguised.”

“Stop a bit,” said the abbé, taking up what he called his pen, and,
after dipping it into the ink, he wrote on a piece of prepared linen,
with his left hand, the first two or three words of the accusation.
Dantès drew back, and gazed on the abbé with a sensation almost
amounting to terror.

“Is there anything else I can assist you in discovering, besides the
villany of your friends?” inquired the abbé with a laugh.

“That is altogether a different and more serious matter,” responded the
abbé. “The ways of justice are frequently too dark and mysterious to be
easily penetrated. All we have hitherto done in the matter has been
child’s play. If you wish me to enter upon the more difficult part of
the business, you must assist me by the most minute information on
every point.”

“So,” answered the abbé. “Old enough to be ambitious, but too young to
be corrupt. And how did he treat you?”

“Noirtier!” repeated the abbé; “Noirtier!—I knew a person of that name
at the court of the Queen of Etruria,—a Noirtier, who had been a
Girondin during the Revolution! What was your deputy called?”

“De Villefort!” The abbé burst into a fit of laughter, while Dantès
gazed on him in utter astonishment.

“Yes, his father,” replied the abbé; “his right name was Noirtier de
Villefort.”

At this instant a bright light shot through the mind of Dantès, and
cleared up all that had been dark and obscure before. The change that
had come over Villefort during the examination, the destruction of the
letter, the exacted promise, the almost supplicating tones of the
magistrate, who seemed rather to implore mercy than to pronounce
punishment,—all returned with a stunning force to his memory. He cried
out, and staggered against the wall like a drunken man, then he hurried
to the opening that led from the abbé’s cell to his own, and said, “I
must be alone, to think over all this.”

Dantès was at length roused from his reverie by the voice of Faria,
who, having also been visited by his jailer, had come to invite his
fellow-sufferer to share his supper. The reputation of being out of his
mind, though harmlessly and even amusingly so, had procured for the
abbé unusual privileges. He was supplied with bread of a finer, whiter
quality than the usual prison fare, and even regaled each Sunday with a
small quantity of wine. Now this was a Sunday, and the abbé had come to
ask his young companion to share the luxuries with him.

Dantès followed him; his features were no longer contracted, and now
wore their usual expression, but there was that in his whole appearance
that bespoke one who had come to a fixed and desperate resolve. Faria
bent on him his penetrating eye.

Again the abbé looked at him, then mournfully shook his head; but in
accordance with Dantès’ request, he began to speak of other matters.
The elder prisoner was one of those persons whose conversation, like
that of all who have experienced many trials, contained many useful and
important hints as well as sound information; but it was never
egotistical, for the unfortunate man never alluded to his own sorrows.
Dantès listened with admiring attention to all he said; some of his
remarks corresponded with what he already knew, or applied to the sort
of knowledge his nautical life had enabled him to acquire. A part of
the good abbé’s words, however, were wholly incomprehensible to him;
but, like the aurora which guides the navigator in northern latitudes,
opened new vistas to the inquiring mind of the listener, and gave
fantastic glimpses of new horizons, enabling him justly to estimate the
delight an intellectual mind would have in following one so richly
gifted as Faria along the heights of truth, where he was so much at
home.

“Everything,” said the abbé. And that very evening the prisoners
sketched a plan of education, to be entered upon the following day.
Dantès possessed a prodigious memory, combined with an astonishing
quickness and readiness of conception; the mathematical turn of his
mind rendered him apt at all kinds of calculation, while his naturally
poetical feelings threw a light and pleasing veil over the dry reality
of arithmetical computation, or the rigid severity of geometry. He
already knew Italian, and had also picked up a little of the Romaic
dialect during voyages to the East; and by the aid of these two
languages he easily comprehended the construction of all the others, so
that at the end of six months he began to speak Spanish, English, and
German.

In strict accordance with the promise made to the abbé, Dantès spoke no
more of escape. Perhaps the delight his studies afforded him left no
room for such thoughts; perhaps the recollection that he had pledged
his word (on which his sense of honor was keen) kept him from referring
in any way to the possibilities of flight. Days, even months, passed by
unheeded in one rapid and instructive course. At the end of a year
Dantès was a new man. Dantès observed, however, that Faria, in spite of
the relief his society afforded, daily grew sadder; one thought seemed
incessantly to harass and distract his mind. Sometimes he would fall
into long reveries, sigh heavily and involuntarily, then suddenly rise,
and, with folded arms, begin pacing the confined space of his dungeon.
One day he stopped all at once, and exclaimed:

“I have already told you,” answered the abbé, “that I loathe the idea
of shedding blood.”

“Incessantly, alas!” cried the abbé.

“No, no,” cried the abbé; “impossible!”

Dantès endeavored to renew the subject; the abbé shook his head in
token of disapproval, and refused to make any further response. Three
months passed away.

“Are you strong?” the abbé asked one day of Dantès. The young man, in
reply, took up the chisel, bent it into the form of a horseshoe, and
then as readily straightened it.

“Then,” said the abbé, “we may hope to put our design into execution.”

“Do you consider the last twelve months to have been wasted?” asked the
abbé.

“Tut, tut!” answered the abbé, “man is but man after all, and you are
about the best specimen of the genus I have ever known. Come, let me
show you my plan.”

The abbé then showed Dantès the sketch he had made for their escape. It
consisted of a plan of his own cell and that of Dantès, with the
passage which united them. In this passage he proposed to drive a level
as they do in mines; this level would bring the two prisoners
immediately beneath the gallery where the sentry kept watch; once
there, a large excavation would be made, and one of the flag-stones
with which the gallery was paved be so completely loosened that at the
desired moment it would give way beneath the feet of the soldier, who,
stunned by his fall, would be immediately bound and gagged by Dantès
before he had power to offer any resistance. The prisoners were then to
make their way through one of the gallery windows, and to let
themselves down from the outer walls by means of the abbé’s ladder of
cords.

Dantès’ eyes sparkled with joy, and he rubbed his hands with delight at
the idea of a plan so simple, yet apparently so certain to succeed.
That very day the miners began their labors, with a vigor and alacrity
proportionate to their long rest from fatigue and their hopes of
ultimate success. Nothing interrupted the progress of the work except
the necessity that each was under of returning to his cell in
anticipation of the turnkey’s visits. They had learned to distinguish
the almost imperceptible sound of his footsteps as he descended towards
their dungeons, and happily, never failed of being prepared for his
coming. The fresh earth excavated during their present work, and which
would have entirely blocked up the old passage, was thrown, by degrees
and with the utmost precaution, out of the window in either Faria’s or
Dantès’ cell, the rubbish being first pulverized so finely that the
night wind carried it far away without permitting the smallest trace to
remain.

More than a year had been consumed in this undertaking, the only tools
for which had been a chisel, a knife, and a wooden lever; Faria still
continuing to instruct Dantès by conversing with him, sometimes in one
language, sometimes in another; at others, relating to him the history
of nations and great men who from time to time have risen to fame and
trodden the path of glory. The abbé was a man of the world, and had,
moreover, mixed in the first society of the day; he wore an air of
melancholy dignity which Dantès, thanks to the imitative powers
bestowed on him by nature, easily acquired, as well as that outward
polish and politeness he had before been wanting in, and which is
seldom possessed except by those who have been placed in constant
intercourse with persons of high birth and breeding.

At the end of fifteen months the level was finished, and the excavation
completed beneath the gallery, and the two workmen could distinctly
hear the measured tread of the sentinel as he paced to and fro over
their heads. Compelled, as they were, to await a night sufficiently
dark to favor their flight, they were obliged to defer their final
attempt till that auspicious moment should arrive; their greatest dread
now was lest the stone through which the sentry was doomed to fall
should give way before its right time, and this they had in some
measure provided against by propping it up with a small beam which they
had discovered in the walls through which they had worked their way.
Dantès was occupied in arranging this piece of wood when he heard
Faria, who had remained in Edmond’s cell for the purpose of cutting a
peg to secure their rope-ladder, call to him in a tone indicative of
great suffering. Dantès hastened to his dungeon, where he found him
standing in the middle of the room, pale as death, his forehead
streaming with perspiration, and his hands clenched tightly together.

“Quick! quick!” returned the abbé, “listen to what I have to say.”

Dantès looked in fear and wonder at the livid countenance of Faria,
whose eyes, already dull and sunken, were surrounded by purple circles,
while his lips were white as those of a corpse, and his very hair
seemed to stand on end.

“Alas,” faltered out the abbé, “all is over with me. I am seized with a
terrible, perhaps mortal illness; I can feel that the paroxysm is fast
approaching. I had a similar attack the year previous to my
imprisonment. This malady admits but of one remedy; I will tell you
what that is. Go into my cell as quickly as you can; draw out one of
the feet that support the bed; you will find it has been hollowed out
for the purpose of containing a small phial you will see there
half-filled with a red-looking fluid. Bring it to me—or rather—no,
no!—I may be found here, therefore help me back to my room while I have
the strength to drag myself along. Who knows what may happen, or how
long the attack may last?”

In spite of the magnitude of the misfortune which thus suddenly
frustrated his hopes, Dantès did not lose his presence of mind, but
descended into the passage, dragging his unfortunate companion with
him; then, half-carrying, half-supporting him, he managed to reach the
abbé’s chamber, when he immediately laid the sufferer on his bed.

“Thanks,” said the poor abbé, shivering as though his veins were filled
with ice. “I am about to be seized with a fit of catalepsy; when it
comes to its height I shall probably lie still and motionless as though
dead, uttering neither sigh nor groan. On the other hand, the symptoms
may be much more violent, and cause me to fall into fearful
convulsions, foam at the mouth, and cry out loudly. Take care my cries
are not heard, for if they are it is more than probable I should be
removed to another part of the prison, and we be separated forever.
When I become quite motionless, cold, and rigid as a corpse, then, and
not before,—be careful about this,—force open my teeth with the knife,
pour from eight to ten drops of the liquor contained in the phial down
my throat, and I may perhaps revive.”

“Help! help!” cried the abbé, “I—I—die—I——”

The young man sprang to the entrance, darted through it, carefully
drawing the stone over the opening, and hurried to his cell. He had
scarcely done so before the door opened, and the jailer saw the
prisoner seated as usual on the side of his bed. Almost before the key
had turned in the lock, and before the departing steps of the jailer
had died away in the long corridor he had to traverse, Dantès, whose
restless anxiety concerning his friend left him no desire to touch the
food brought him, hurried back to the abbé’s chamber, and raising the
stone by pressing his head against it, was soon beside the sick man’s
couch. Faria had now fully regained his consciousness, but he still lay
helpless and exhausted on his miserable bed.

“At least,” said the abbé, “I now see how wrong such an opinion would
have been. Alas, alas! I am fearfully exhausted and debilitated by this
attack.”

“Be of good cheer,” replied Dantès; “your strength will return.” And as
he spoke he seated himself near the bed beside Faria, and took his
hands. The abbé shook his head.

“My good Edmond,” answered the abbé, “be not deceived. The attack which
has just passed away, condemns me forever to the walls of a prison.
None can fly from a dungeon who cannot walk.”

“I shall never swim again,” replied Faria. “This arm is paralyzed; not
for a time, but forever. Lift it, and judge if I am mistaken.”

“You are convinced now, Edmond, are you not?” asked the abbé. “Depend
upon it, I know what I say. Since the first attack I experienced of
this malady, I have continually reflected on it. Indeed, I expected it,
for it is a family inheritance; both my father and grandfather died of
it in a third attack. The physician who prepared for me the remedy I
have twice successfully taken, was no other than the celebrated
Cabanis, and he predicted a similar end for me.”

“My son,” said the abbé, “you, who are a sailor and a swimmer, must
know as well as I do that a man so loaded would sink before he had done
fifty strokes. Cease, then, to allow yourself to be duped by vain
hopes, that even your own excellent heart refuses to believe in. Here I
shall remain till the hour of my deliverance arrives, and that, in all
human probability, will be the hour of my death. As for you, who are
young and active, delay not on my account, but fly—go—I give you back
your promise.”

Faria gazed fondly on his noble-minded, single-hearted, high-principled
young friend, and read in his countenance ample confirmation of the
sincerity of his devotion and the loyalty of his purpose.

Dantès took the hand of the abbé in his, and affectionately pressed it.
Faria smiled encouragingly on him, and the young man retired to his
task, in the spirit of obedience and respect which he had sworn to show
towards his aged friend.

When Dantès returned next morning to the chamber of his companion in
captivity, he found Faria seated and looking composed. In the ray of
light which entered by the narrow window of his cell, he held open in
his left hand, of which alone, it will be recollected, he retained the
use, a sheet of paper, which, from being constantly rolled into a small
compass, had the form of a cylinder, and was not easily kept open. He
did not speak, but showed the paper to Dantès.

“Look at it,” said the abbé with a smile.

“This paper, my friend,” said Faria, “I may now avow to you, since I
have the proof of your fidelity—this paper is my treasure, of which,
from this day forth, one-half belongs to you.”

The sweat started forth on Dantès’ brow. Until this day and for how
long a time!—he had refrained from talking of the treasure, which had
brought upon the abbé the accusation of madness. With his instinctive
delicacy Edmond had preferred avoiding any touch on this painful chord,
and Faria had been equally silent. He had taken the silence of the old
man for a return to reason; and now these few words uttered by Faria,
after so painful a crisis, seemed to indicate a serious relapse into
mental alienation.

“Your treasure?” stammered Dantès. Faria smiled.

“You persist in your incredulity, Edmond,” continued Faria. “My words
have not convinced you. I see you require proofs. Well, then, read this
paper, which I have never shown to anyone.”

“Well!” said Faria, when the young man had finished reading it.

And Dantès, happy to escape the history and explanation which would be
sure to confirm his belief in his friend’s mental instability, glided
like a snake along the narrow passage; while Faria, restored by his
alarm to a certain amount of activity, pushed the stone into place with
his foot, and covered it with a mat in order the more effectually to
avoid discovery.

It was the governor, who, hearing of Faria’s illness from the jailer,
had come in person to see him.

Faria sat up to receive him, avoiding all gestures in order that he
might conceal from the governor the paralysis that had already half
stricken him with death. His fear was lest the governor, touched with
pity, might order him to be removed to better quarters, and thus
separate him from his young companion. But fortunately this was not the
case, and the governor left him, convinced that the poor madman, for
whom in his heart he felt a kind of affection, was only troubled with a
slight indisposition.

During this time, Edmond, seated on his bed with his head in his hands,
tried to collect his scattered thoughts. Faria, since their first
acquaintance, had been on all points so rational and logical, so
wonderfully sagacious, in fact, that he could not understand how so
much wisdom on all points could be allied with madness. Was Faria
deceived as to his treasure, or was all the world deceived as to Faria?

Dantès remained in his cell all day, not daring to return to his
friend, thinking thus to defer the moment when he should be convinced,
once for all, that the abbé was mad—such a conviction would be so
terrible!

But, towards the evening after the hour for the customary visit had
gone by, Faria, not seeing the young man appear, tried to move and get
over the distance which separated them. Edmond shuddered when he heard
the painful efforts which the old man made to drag himself along; his
leg was inert, and he could no longer make use of one arm. Edmond was
obliged to assist him, for otherwise he would not have been able to
enter by the small aperture which led to Dantès’ chamber.

“You know,” said the abbé, “that I was the secretary and intimate
friend of Cardinal Spada, the last of the princes of that name. I owe
to this worthy lord all the happiness I ever knew. He was not rich,
although the wealth of his family had passed into a proverb, and I
heard the phrase very often, ‘As rich as a Spada.’ But he, like public
rumor, lived on this reputation for wealth; his palace was my paradise.
I was tutor to his nephews, who are dead; and when he was alone in the
world, I tried by absolute devotion to his will, to make up to him all
he had done for me during ten years of unremitting kindness. The
cardinal’s house had no secrets for me. I had often seen my noble
patron annotating ancient volumes, and eagerly searching amongst dusty
family manuscripts. One day when I was reproaching him for his
unavailing searches, and deploring the prostration of mind that
followed them, he looked at me, and, smiling bitterly, opened a volume
relating to the History of the City of Rome. There, in the twentieth
chapter of the Life of Pope Alexander VI., were the following lines,
which I can never forget:—

“Up to this point,” said Faria, interrupting the thread of his
narrative, “this seems to you very meaningless, no doubt, eh?”

Faria, with an air of triumph, offered the paper to Dantès, who this
time read the following words, traced with an ink of a reddish color
resembling rust:

“And now,” said the abbé, “read this other paper;” and he presented to
Dantès a second leaf with fragments of lines written on it, which
Edmond read as follows:

Faria followed him with an excited look.

“Well, do you comprehend now?” inquired Faria.

“Now,” continued Faria, addressing Dantès with an almost paternal
expression, “now, my dear fellow, you know as much as I do myself. If
we ever escape together, half this treasure is yours; if I die here,
and you escape alone, the whole belongs to you.”

“I have only kept this secret so long from you,” continued Faria, “that
I might test your character, and then surprise you. Had we escaped
before my attack of catalepsy, I should have conducted you to Monte
Cristo; now,” he added, with a sigh, “it is you who will conduct me
thither. Well, Dantès, you do not thank me?”

And Faria extended the arm of which alone the use remained to him to
the young man, who threw himself upon his neck and wept.

Now that this treasure, which had so long been the object of the abbé’s
meditations, could insure the future happiness of him whom Faria really
loved as a son, it had doubled its value in his eyes, and every day he
expatiated on the amount, explaining to Dantès all the good which, with
thirteen or fourteen millions of francs, a man could do in these days
to his friends; and then Dantès’ countenance became gloomy, for the
oath of vengeance he had taken recurred to his memory, and he reflected
how much ill, in these times, a man with thirteen or fourteen millions
could do to his enemies.

The abbé did not know the Island of Monte Cristo; but Dantès knew it,
and had often passed it, situated twenty-five miles from Pianosa,
between Corsica and the Island of Elba, and had once touched there.
This island was, always had been, and still is, completely deserted. It
is a rock of almost conical form, which looks as though it had been
thrust up by volcanic force from the depth to the surface of the ocean.
Dantès drew a plan of the island for Faria, and Faria gave Dantès
advice as to the means he should employ to recover the treasure. But
Dantès was far from being as enthusiastic and confident as the old man.
It was past a question now that Faria was not a lunatic, and the way in
which he had achieved the discovery, which had given rise to the
suspicion of his madness, increased Edmond’s admiration of him; but at
the same time Dantès could not believe that the deposit, supposing it
had ever existed, still existed; and though he considered the treasure
as by no means chimerical, he yet believed it was no longer there.

However, as if fate resolved on depriving the prisoners of their last
chance, and making them understand that they were condemned to
perpetual imprisonment, a new misfortune befell them; the gallery on
the sea side, which had long been in ruins, was rebuilt. They had
repaired it completely, and stopped up with vast masses of stone the
hole Dantès had partly filled in. But for this precaution, which, it
will be remembered, the abbé had made to Edmond, the misfortune would
have been still greater, for their attempt to escape would have been
detected, and they would undoubtedly have been separated. Thus a new, a
stronger, and more inexorable barrier was interposed to cut off the
realization of their hopes.

“You see,” said the young man, with an air of sorrowful resignation, to
Faria, “that God deems it right to take from me any claim to merit for
what you call my devotion to you. I have promised to remain forever
with you, and now I could not break my promise if I would. The treasure
will be no more mine than yours, and neither of us will quit this
prison. But my real treasure is not that, my dear friend, which awaits
me beneath the sombre rocks of Monte Cristo, it is your presence, our
living together five or six hours a day, in spite of our jailers; it is
the rays of intelligence you have elicited from my brain, the languages
you have implanted in my memory, and which have taken root there with
all their philological ramifications. These different sciences that you
have made so easy to me by the depth of the knowledge you possess of
them, and the clearness of the principles to which you have reduced
them—this is my treasure, my beloved friend, and with this you have
made me rich and happy. Believe me, and take comfort, this is better
for me than tons of gold and cases of diamonds, even were they not as
problematical as the clouds we see in the morning floating over the
sea, which we take for _terra firma_, and which evaporate and vanish as
we draw near to them. To have you as long as possible near me, to hear
your eloquent speech,—which embellishes my mind, strengthens my soul,
and makes my whole frame capable of great and terrible things, if I
should ever be free,—so fills my whole existence, that the despair to
which I was just on the point of yielding when I knew you, has no
longer any hold over me; and this—this is my fortune—not chimerical,
but actual. I owe you my real good, my present happiness; and all the
sovereigns of the earth, even Cæsar Borgia himself, could not deprive
me of this.”

Thus, if not actually happy, yet the days these two unfortunates passed
together went quickly. Faria, who for so long a time had kept silence
as to the treasure, now perpetually talked of it. As he had prophesied
would be the case, he remained paralyzed in the right arm and the left
leg, and had given up all hope of ever enjoying it himself. But he was
continually thinking over some means of escape for his young companion,
and anticipating the pleasure he would enjoy. For fear the letter might
be some day lost or stolen, he compelled Dantès to learn it by heart;
and Dantès knew it from the first to the last word. Then he destroyed
the second portion, assured that if the first were seized, no one would
be able to discover its real meaning. Whole hours sometimes passed
while Faria was giving instructions to Dantès,—instructions which were
to serve him when he was at liberty. Then, once free, from the day and
hour and moment when he was so, he could have but one only thought,
which was, to gain Monte Cristo by some means, and remain there alone
under some pretext which would arouse no suspicions; and once there, to
endeavor to find the wonderful caverns, and search in the appointed
spot,—the appointed spot, be it remembered, being the farthest angle in
the second opening.

In the meanwhile the hours passed, if not rapidly, at least tolerably.
Faria, as we have said, without having recovered the use of his hand
and foot, had regained all the clearness of his understanding, and had
gradually, besides the moral instructions we have detailed, taught his
youthful companion the patient and sublime duty of a prisoner, who
learns to make something from nothing. They were thus perpetually
employed,—Faria, that he might not see himself grow old; Dantès, for
fear of recalling the almost extinct past which now only floated in his
memory like a distant light wandering in the night. So life went on for
them as it does for those who are not victims of misfortune and whose
activities glide along mechanically and tranquilly beneath the eye of
Providence.

But beneath this superficial calm there were in the heart of the young
man, and perhaps in that of the old man, many repressed desires, many
stifled sighs, which found vent when Faria was left alone, and when
Edmond returned to his cell.

One night Edmond awoke suddenly, believing that he heard someone
calling him. He opened his eyes upon utter darkness. His name, or
rather a plaintive voice which essayed to pronounce his name, reached
him. He sat up in bed and a cold sweat broke out upon his brow.
Undoubtedly the call came from Faria’s dungeon.

“Alas, my dear friend,” said Faria in a resigned tone, “you understand,
do you not, and I need not attempt to explain to you?”

Faria had just sufficient strength to restrain him.

“There is not a hope,” replied Faria, shaking his head, “but no matter;
God wills it that man whom he has created, and in whose heart he has so
profoundly rooted the love of life, should do all in his power to
preserve that existence, which, however painful it may be, is yet
always so dear.”

“And now, my dear friend,” said Faria, “sole consolation of my wretched
existence,—you whom Heaven gave me somewhat late, but still gave me, a
priceless gift, and for which I am most grateful,—at the moment of
separating from you forever, I wish you all the happiness and all the
prosperity you so well deserve. My son, I bless thee!”

“Listen, now, to what I say in this my dying moment. The treasure of
the Spadas exists. God grants me the boon of vision unrestricted by
time or space. I see it in the depths of the inner cavern. My eyes
pierce the inmost recesses of the earth, and are dazzled at the sight
of so much riches. If you do escape, remember that the poor abbé, whom
all the world called mad, was not so. Hasten to Monte Cristo—avail
yourself of the fortune—for you have indeed suffered long enough.”

A violent convulsion attacked the old man. Dantès raised his head and
saw Faria’s eyes injected with blood. It seemed as if a flow of blood
had ascended from the chest to the head.

When he believed that the right moment had arrived, he took the knife,
pried open the teeth, which offered less resistance than before,
counted one after the other twelve drops, and watched; the phial
contained, perhaps, twice as much more. He waited ten minutes, a
quarter of an hour, half an hour,—no change took place. Trembling, his
hair erect, his brow bathed with perspiration, he counted the seconds
by the beating of his heart. Then he thought it was time to make the
last trial, and he put the phial to the purple lips of Faria, and
without having occasion to force open his jaws, which had remained
extended, he poured the whole of the liquid down his throat.

It was time, for the jailer was coming. On this occasion he began his
rounds at Dantès’ cell, and on leaving him he went on to Faria’s
dungeon, taking thither breakfast and some linen. Nothing betokened
that the man knew anything of what had occurred. He went on his way.

The doctor analyzed the symptoms of the malady to which the prisoner
had succumbed, and declared that he was dead. Questions and answers
followed in a nonchalant manner that made Dantès indignant, for he felt
that all the world should have for the poor abbé a love and respect
equal to his own.

“Wasn’t his name Faria?” inquired one of the officers who accompanied
the governor.

“You had never anything to complain of?” said the governor to the
jailer who had charge of the abbé.

“That is impossible,” replied the governor. “The chaplain of the
château came to me yesterday to beg for leave of absence, in order to
take a trip to Hyères for a week. I told him I would attend to the
prisoners in his absence. If the poor abbé had not been in such a
hurry, he might have had his requiem.”

On the bed, at full length, and faintly illuminated by the pale light
that came from the window, lay a sack of canvas, and under its rude
folds was stretched a long and stiffened form; it was Faria’s last
winding-sheet,—a winding-sheet which, as the turnkey said, cost so
little. Everything was in readiness. A barrier had been placed between
Dantès and his old friend. No longer could Edmond look into those
wide-open eyes which had seemed to be penetrating the mysteries of
death; no longer could he clasp the hand which had done so much to make
his existence blessed. Faria, the beneficent and cheerful companion,
with whom he was accustomed to live so intimately, no longer breathed.
He seated himself on the edge of that terrible bed, and fell into
melancholy and gloomy reverie.

Alone! he was alone again! again condemned to silence—again face to
face with nothingness! Alone!—never again to see the face, never again
to hear the voice of the only human being who united him to earth! Was
not Faria’s fate the better, after all—to solve the problem of life at
its source, even at the risk of horrible suffering?

The idea of suicide, which his friend had driven away and kept away by
his cheerful presence, now hovered like a phantom over the abbé’s dead
body.

“Die? oh, no,” he exclaimed—“not die now, after having lived and
suffered so long and so much! Die? yes, had I died years ago; but now
to die would be, indeed, to give way to the sarcasm of destiny. No, I
want to live; I shall struggle to the very last; I will yet win back
the happiness of which I have been deprived. Before I die I must not
forget that I have my executioners to punish, and perhaps, too, who
knows, some friends to reward. Yet they will forget me here, and I
shall die in my dungeon like Faria.”

Without giving himself time to reconsider his decision, and, indeed,
that he might not allow his thoughts to be distracted from his
desperate resolution, he bent over the appalling shroud, opened it with
the knife which Faria had made, drew the corpse from the sack, and bore
it along the tunnel to his own chamber, laid it on his couch, tied
around its head the rag he wore at night around his own, covered it
with his counterpane, once again kissed the ice-cold brow, and tried
vainly to close the resisting eyes, which glared horribly, turned the
head towards the wall, so that the jailer might, when he brought the
evening meal, believe that he was asleep, as was his frequent custom;
entered the tunnel again, drew the bed against the wall, returned to
the other cell, took from the hiding-place the needle and thread, flung
off his rags, that they might feel only naked flesh beneath the coarse
canvas, and getting inside the sack, placed himself in the posture in
which the dead body had been laid, and sewed up the mouth of the sack
from the inside.

“Why, yes, the abbé runs a chance of being wet,” said the other; and
then there was a burst of brutal laughter.

At this moment he saw the light of Planier, gleaming in front of him
like a star. By leaving this light on the right, he kept the Island of
Tiboulen a little on the left; by turning to the left, therefore, he
would find it. But, as we have said, it was at least a league from the
Château d’If to this island. Often in prison Faria had said to him,
when he saw him idle and inactive:

Dantès had not been a day on board before he had a very clear idea of
the men with whom his lot had been cast. Without having been in the
school of the Abbé Faria, the worthy master of _La Jeune Amélie_ (the
name of the Genoese tartan) knew a smattering of all the tongues spoken
on the shores of that large lake called the Mediterranean, from the
Arabic to the Provençal, and this, while it spared him interpreters,
persons always troublesome and frequently indiscreet, gave him great
facilities of communication, either with the vessels he met at sea,
with the small boats sailing along the coast, or with the people
without name, country, or occupation, who are always seen on the quays
of seaports, and who live by hidden and mysterious means which we must
suppose to be a direct gift of Providence, as they have no visible
means of support. It is fair to assume that Dantès was on board a
smuggler.

Fortunately, Dantès had learned how to wait; he had waited fourteen
years for his liberty, and now he was free he could wait at least six
months or a year for wealth. Would he not have accepted liberty without
riches if it had been offered to him? Besides, were not those riches
chimerical?—offspring of the brain of the poor Abbé Faria, had they not
died with him? It is true, the letter of the Cardinal Spada was
singularly circumstantial, and Dantès repeated it to himself, from one
end to the other, for he had not forgotten a word.

Then in the long days on board ship, when the vessel, gliding on with
security over the azure sea, required no care but the hand of the
helmsman, thanks to the favorable winds that swelled her sails, Edmond,
with a chart in his hand, became the instructor of Jacopo, as the poor
Abbé Faria had been his tutor. He pointed out to him the bearings of
the coast, explained to him the variations of the compass, and taught
him to read in that vast book opened over our heads which they call
heaven, and where God writes in azure with letters of diamonds.

“In two hours’ time,” said he, “these persons will depart richer by
fifty piastres each, to go and risk their lives again by endeavoring to
gain fifty more; then they will return with a fortune of six hundred
francs, and waste this treasure in some city with the pride of sultans
and the insolence of nabobs. At this moment hope makes me despise their
riches, which seem to me contemptible. Yet perchance tomorrow deception
will so act on me, that I shall, on compulsion, consider such a
contemptible possession as the utmost happiness. Oh, no!” exclaimed
Edmond, “that will not be. The wise, unerring Faria could not be
mistaken in this one thing. Besides, it were better to die than to
continue to lead this low and wretched life.”

“And now,” he exclaimed, remembering the tale of the Arabian fisherman,
which Faria had related to him, “now, Open Sesame!”

Then following the clew that, in the hands of the Abbé Faria, had been
so skilfully used to guide him through the Dædalian labyrinth of
probabilities, he thought that the Cardinal Spada, anxious not to be
watched, had entered the creek, concealed his little barque, followed
the line marked by the notches in the rock, and at the end of it had
buried his treasure. It was this idea that had brought Dantès back to
the circular rock. One thing only perplexed Edmond, and destroyed his
theory. How could this rock, which weighed several tons, have been
lifted to this spot, without the aid of many men?

“Come,” said he to himself, “be a man. I am accustomed to adversity. I
must not be cast down by the discovery that I have been deceived. What,
then, would be the use of all I have suffered? The heart breaks when,
after having been elated by flattering hopes, it sees all its illusions
destroyed. Faria has dreamed this; the Cardinal Spada buried no
treasure here; perhaps he never came here, or if he did, Cæsar Borgia,
the intrepid adventurer, the stealthy and indefatigable plunderer, has
followed him, discovered his traces, pursued them as I have done,
raised the stone, and descending before me, has left me nothing.”

“Alas,” said Edmond, smiling, “these are the treasures the cardinal has
left; and the good abbé, seeing in a dream these glittering walls, has
indulged in fallacious hopes.”

But by some strange play of emotion, in proportion as the proofs that
Faria, had not been deceived became stronger, so did his heart give
way, and a feeling of discouragement stole over him. This last proof,
instead of giving him fresh strength, deprived him of it; the pickaxe
descended, or rather fell; he placed it on the ground, passed his hand
over his brow, and remounted the stairs, alleging to himself, as an
excuse, a desire to be assured that no one was watching him, but in
reality because he felt that he was about to faint.

Dantès easily recognized them, Faria had so often drawn them for him.
There was no longer any doubt: the treasure was there—no one would have
been at such pains to conceal an empty casket. In an instant he had
cleared every obstacle away, and he saw successively the lock, placed
between two padlocks, and the two handles at each end, all carved as
things were carved at that epoch, when art rendered the commonest
metals precious.

Still Dantès could not view without a shudder the approach of a
gendarme who accompanied the officers deputed to demand his bill of
health ere the yacht was permitted to hold communication with the
shore; but with that perfect self-possession he had acquired during his
acquaintance with Faria, Dantès coolly presented an English passport he
had obtained from Leghorn, and as this gave him a standing which a
French passport would not have afforded, he was informed that there
existed no obstacle to his immediate debarkation.

“You are welcome, sir, most welcome!” repeated the astonished
Caderousse. “Now, then, Margotin,” cried he, speaking to the dog, “will
you be quiet? Pray don’t heed him, sir!—he only barks, he never bites.
I make no doubt a glass of good wine would be acceptable this
dreadfully hot day.” Then perceiving for the first time the garb of the
traveller he had to entertain, Caderousse hastily exclaimed: “A
thousand pardons! I really did not observe whom I had the honor to
receive under my poor roof. What would the abbé please to have? What
refreshment can I offer? All I have is at his service.”

Upon issuing forth from his subterranean retreat at the expiration of
five minutes, he found the abbé seated upon a wooden stool, leaning his
elbow on a table, while Margotin, whose animosity seemed appeased by
the unusual command of the traveller for refreshments, had crept up to
him, and had established himself very comfortably between his knees,
his long, skinny neck resting on his lap, while his dim eye was fixed
earnestly on the traveller’s face.

“Ah, sir,” said Caderousse with a sigh, “it is easy to perceive I am
not a rich man; but in this world a man does not thrive the better for
being honest.” The abbé fixed on him a searching, penetrating glance.

“Yes, honest—I can certainly say that much for myself,” continued the
innkeeper, fairly sustaining the scrutiny of the abbé’s gaze; “I can
boast with truth of being an honest man; and,” continued he
significantly, with a hand on his breast and shaking his head, “that is
more than everyone can say nowadays.”

“So much the better for you, if what you assert be true,” said the
abbé; “for I am firmly persuaded that, sooner or later, the good will
be rewarded, and the wicked punished.”

“You are wrong to speak thus,” said the abbé; “and perhaps I may, in my
own person, be able to prove to you how completely you are in error.”

“Dantès? Did I know poor dear Edmond? Why, Edmond Dantès and myself
were intimate friends!” exclaimed Caderousse, whose countenance flushed
darkly as he caught the penetrating gaze of the abbé fixed on him,
while the clear, calm eye of the questioner seemed to dilate with
feverish scrutiny.

“You speak as though you had loved this young Dantès,” observed the
abbé, without taking any notice of his companion’s vehemence.

There was a brief silence, during which the fixed, searching eye of the
abbé was employed in scrutinizing the agitated features of the
innkeeper.

“But the strangest part of the story is,” resumed the abbé, “that
Dantès, even in his dying moments, swore by his crucified Redeemer,
that he was utterly ignorant of the cause of his detention.”

And here the look of the abbé, becoming more and more fixed, seemed to
rest with ill-concealed satisfaction on the gloomy depression which was
rapidly spreading over the countenance of Caderousse.

“A rich Englishman,” continued the abbé, “who had been his companion in
misfortune, but had been released from prison during the second
restoration, was possessed of a diamond of immense value; this jewel he
bestowed on Dantès upon himself quitting the prison, as a mark of his
gratitude for the kindness and brotherly care with which Dantès had
nursed him in a severe illness he underwent during his confinement.
Instead of employing this diamond in attempting to bribe his jailers,
who might only have taken it and then betrayed him to the governor,
Dantès carefully preserved it, that in the event of his getting out of
prison he might have wherewithal to live, for the sale of such a
diamond would have quite sufficed to make his fortune.”

“Why, everything is relative,” answered the abbé. “To one in Edmond’s
position the diamond certainly was of great value. It was estimated at
fifty thousand francs.”

“No,” replied the abbé, “it was not of such a size as that; but you
shall judge for yourself. I have it with me.”

The sharp gaze of Caderousse was instantly directed towards the
priest’s garments, as though hoping to discover the location of the
treasure. Calmly drawing forth from his pocket a small box covered with
black shagreen, the abbé opened it, and displayed to the dazzled eyes
of Caderousse the sparkling jewel it contained, set in a ring of
admirable workmanship.

“It is, without the setting, which is also valuable,” replied the abbé,
as he closed the box, and returned it to his pocket, while its
brilliant hues seemed still to dance before the eyes of the fascinated
innkeeper.

“‘Another of the number,’” continued the abbé, without seeming to
notice the emotion of Caderousse, “‘is called Danglars; and the third,
in spite of being my rival, entertained a very sincere affection for
me.’”

A fiendish smile played over the features of Caderousse, who was about
to break in upon the abbé’s speech, when the latter, waving his hand,
said, “Allow me to finish first, and then if you have any observations
to make, you can do so afterwards. ‘The third of my friends, although
my rival, was much attached to me,—his name was Fernand; that of my
betrothed was’—Stay, stay,” continued the abbé, “I have forgotten what
he called her.”

“True,” said the abbé, with a stifled sigh, “Mercédès it was.”

“Bring me a _carafe_ of water,” said the abbé.

Caderousse quickly performed the stranger’s bidding; and after pouring
some into a glass, and slowly swallowing its contents, the abbé,
resuming his usual placidity of manner, said, as he placed his empty
glass on the table:

“I learned so much at Marseilles,” replied the abbé, making a strong
effort to appear indifferent; “but from the length of time that has
elapsed since the death of the elder Dantès, I was unable to obtain any
particulars of his end. Can you enlighten me on that point?”

“Starvation!” exclaimed the abbé, springing from his seat. “Why, the
vilest animals are not suffered to die by such a death as that. The
very dogs that wander houseless and homeless in the streets find some
pitying hand to cast them a mouthful of bread; and that a man, a
Christian, should be allowed to perish of hunger in the midst of other
men who call themselves Christians, is too horrible for belief. Oh, it
is impossible!—utterly impossible!”

“I pledge you my word, madam,” said the abbé, “that my intentions are
good; and that your husband can incur no risk, provided he answers me
candidly.”

La Carconte muttered a few inarticulate words, then let her head again
drop upon her knees, and went into a fit of ague, leaving the two
speakers to resume the conversation, but remaining so as to be able to
hear every word they uttered. Again the abbé had been obliged to
swallow a draught of water to calm the emotions that threatened to
overpower him.

“And was he not so?” asked the abbé.

Caderousse made no reply to these words, though evidently irritated and
annoyed by the interruption, but, addressing the abbé, said, “Can a man
be faithful to another whose wife he covets and desires for himself?
But Dantès was so honorable and true in his own nature, that he
believed everybody’s professions of friendship. Poor Edmond, he was
cruelly deceived; but it was fortunate that he never knew, or he might
have found it more difficult, when on his deathbed, to pardon his
enemies. And, whatever people may say,” continued Caderousse, in his
native language, which was not altogether devoid of rude poetry, “I
cannot help being more frightened at the idea of the malediction of the
dead than the hatred of the living.”

“Do you, then, know in what manner Fernand injured Dantès?” inquired
the abbé of Caderousse.

“So you will say nothing?” asked the abbé.

“You prefer, then,” said the abbé, “that I should bestow on men you say
are false and treacherous, the reward intended for faithful
friendship?”

“How so?” inquired the abbé. “Are these persons, then, so rich and
powerful?”

“Well, my good friend,” returned the abbé, in a tone that indicated
utter indifference on his part, “you are at liberty, either to speak or
be silent, just as you please; for my own part, I respect your scruples
and admire your sentiments; so let the matter end. I shall do my duty
as conscientiously as I can, and fulfil my promise to the dying man. My
first business will be to dispose of this diamond.”

So saying, the abbé again drew the small box from his pocket, opened
it, and contrived to hold it in such a light, that a bright flash of
brilliant hues passed before the dazzled gaze of Caderousse.

“It does,” replied the abbé; “with the addition of an equal division of
that part intended for the elder Dantès, which I believe myself at
liberty to divide equally with the four survivors.”

“Remember,” answered the abbé calmly, as he replaced the jewel and its
case in the pocket of his cassock, “it is your fault, not mine, that I
do so. You will have the goodness to furnish me with the address of
both Fernand and Danglars, in order that I may execute Edmond’s last
wishes.”

The agitation of Caderousse became extreme, and large drops of
perspiration rolled from his heated brow. As he saw the abbé rise from
his seat and go towards the door, as though to ascertain if his horse
were sufficiently refreshed to continue his journey, Caderousse and his
wife exchanged looks of deep meaning.

“Well,” asked the abbé, as he returned to the apartment below, “what
have you made up your mind to do?”

“I am all attention,” said the abbé.

During this time the abbé had chosen his place for listening at his
ease. He removed his seat into a corner of the room, where he himself
would be in deep shadow, while the light would be fully thrown on the
narrator; then, with head bent down and hands clasped, or rather
clenched together, he prepared to give his whole attention to
Caderousse, who seated himself on the little stool, exactly opposite to
him.

“What is that?” inquired the abbé.

“Make yourself easy, my friend,” replied the abbé. “I am a priest, and
confessions die in my breast. Recollect, our only desire is to carry
out, in a fitting manner, the last wishes of our friend. Speak, then,
without reserve, as without hatred; tell the truth, the whole truth; I
do not know, never may know, the persons of whom you are about to
speak; besides, I am an Italian, and not a Frenchman, and belong to
God, and not to man, and I shall shortly retire to my convent, which I
have only quitted to fulfil the last wishes of a dying man.”

“Begin with his father, if you please.” said the abbé; “Edmond talked
to me a great deal about the old man for whom he had the deepest love.”

“Yes.” answered the abbé; “Edmond related to me everything until the
moment when he was arrested in a small cabaret close to Marseilles.”

“But did you not go upstairs and try to console the poor old man?”
asked the abbé.

The abbé uttered a kind of groan.

“Yes,” replied the abbé, “it is very affecting.”

The abbé rose from his chair, made two turns round the chamber, and
pressed his trembling hand against his parched throat.

The abbé, with a shaking hand, seized a glass of water that was
standing by him half-full, swallowed it at one gulp, and then resumed
his seat, with red eyes and pale cheeks.

“Tell me of those men,” said the abbé, “and remember too,” he added in
an almost menacing tone, “you have promised to tell me everything. Tell
me, therefore, who are these men who killed the son with despair, and
the father with famine?”

“’Twas so, then—’twas so, then,” murmured the abbé. “Oh, Faria, Faria,
how well did you judge men and things!”

“But,” exclaimed the abbé suddenly, “you were there yourself.”

The abbé saw he had overshot the mark, and he added quickly,—“No one;
but in order to have known everything so well, you must have been an
eye-witness.”

“And did you not remonstrate against such infamy?” asked the abbé; “if
not, you were an accomplice.”

“Well, sir,” said the abbé, “you have spoken unreservedly; and thus to
accuse yourself is to deserve pardon.”

“He did not know,” said the abbé.

There was a brief silence; the abbé rose and paced up and down
pensively, and then resumed his seat.

“And what part did he play in this sad drama?” inquired the abbé.

“And,” asked the abbé, “is M. Morrel still alive?”

“In that case,” replied the abbé, “he should be a man blessed of God,
rich, happy.”

“What! M. Morrel unhappy?” exclaimed the abbé.

“And has the unfortunate man wife or children?” inquired the abbé.

“Ah!” said the abbé, in a peculiar tone, “he is happy.”

“Destiny! destiny!” murmured the abbé.

“So that now——?” inquired the abbé.

The abbé opened his mouth, hesitated for a moment, then, making an
effort at self-control, he said, “And Mercédès—they tell me that she
has disappeared?”

“Has she made a fortune also?” inquired the abbé, with an ironical
smile.

“Go on,” said the abbé; “it seems as if I were listening to the story
of a dream. But I have seen things so extraordinary, that what you tell
me seems less astonishing than it otherwise might.”

“So that,” said the abbé, with a bitter smile, “that makes eighteen
months in all. What more could the most devoted lover desire?” Then he
murmured the words of the English poet, “‘Frailty, thy name is woman.’”

The abbé started. “Her son?” said he.

“But, then, to be able to instruct her child,” continued the abbé, “she
must have received an education herself. I understood from Edmond that
she was the daughter of a simple fisherman, beautiful but uneducated.”

“And yet what?” asked the abbé.

“And M. de Villefort?” asked the abbé.

“You are mistaken, my friend,” replied the abbé; “God may seem
sometimes to forget for a time, while his justice reposes, but there
always comes a moment when he remembers—and behold—a proof!”

As he spoke, the abbé took the diamond from his pocket, and giving it
to Caderousse, said, “Here, my friend, take this diamond, it is yours.”

Caderousse, more and more astonished, went toward a large oaken
cupboard, opened it, and gave the abbé a long purse of faded red silk,
round which were two copper runners that had once been gilt. The abbé
took it, and in return gave Caderousse the diamond.

“Which,” said the abbé to himself, “you would have done.” The abbé
rose, took his hat and gloves. “Well,” he said, “all you have told me
is perfectly true, then, and I may believe it in every particular.”

“’Tis well,” said the abbé, convinced by his manner and tone that
Caderousse spoke the truth. “’Tis well, and may this money profit you!
Adieu; I go far from men who thus so bitterly injure each other.”

The abbé with difficulty got away from the enthusiastic thanks of
Caderousse, opened the door himself, got out and mounted his horse,
once more saluted the innkeeper, who kept uttering his loud farewells,
and then returned by the road he had travelled in coming.

“Well, sir, I was educated at Rome by a poor devil of an abbé, who
disappeared suddenly. I have since learned that he was confined in the
Château d’If, and I should like to learn some particulars of his
death.”

“Oh dear, yes, sir; the abbé’s dungeon was forty or fifty feet distant
from that of one of Bonaparte’s emissaries,—one of those who had
contributed the most to the return of the usurper in 1815, a very
resolute and very dangerous man.”

“No doubt; but unfortunately for the prisoners, the Abbé Faria had an
attack of catalepsy, and died.”

“Yes, indeed. So, sir, you wish to see all relating to the poor abbé,
who really was gentleness itself.”

And they both entered M. de Boville’s study. Everything was here
arranged in perfect order; each register had its number, each file of
papers its place. The inspector begged the Englishman to seat himself
in an armchair, and placed before him the register and documents
relative to the Château d’If, giving him all the time he desired for
the examination, while De Boville seated himself in a corner, and began
to read his newspaper. The Englishman easily found the entries relative
to the Abbé Faria; but it seemed that the history which the inspector
had related interested him greatly, for after having perused the first
documents he turned over the leaves until he reached the deposition
respecting Edmond Dantès. There he found everything arranged in due
order,—the accusation, examination, Morrel’s petition, M. de
Villefort’s marginal notes. He folded up the accusation quietly, and
put it as quietly in his pocket; read the examination, and saw that the
name of Noirtier was not mentioned in it; perused, too, the application
dated 10th April, 1815, in which Morrel, by the deputy procureur’s
advice, exaggerated with the best intentions (for Napoleon was then on
the throne) the services Dantès had rendered to the imperial
cause—services which Villefort’s certificates rendered indisputable.
Then he saw through the whole thing. This petition to Napoleon, kept
back by Villefort, had become, under the second restoration, a terrible
weapon against him in the hands of the king’s attorney. He was no
longer astonished when he searched on to find in the register this
note, placed in a bracket against his name:

As we have said, the inspector, from discretion, and that he might not
disturb the Abbé Faria’s pupil in his researches, had seated himself in
a corner, and was reading _Le Drapeau Blanc_. He did not see the
Englishman fold up and place in his pocket the accusation written by
Danglars under the arbor of La Réserve, and which had the postmark,
“Marseilles, 27th February, delivery 6 o’clock, P.M.”

“The Abbé Busoni, then told me an untruth,” said he, “when, after his
journey in France, in 1829, he sent you to me, with a letter of
recommendation, in which he enumerated all your valuable qualities.
Well, I shall write to the abbé; I shall hold him responsible for his
_protégé’s_ misconduct, and I shall soon know all about this
assassination. Only I warn you, that when I reside in a country, I
conform to all its code, and I have no wish to put myself within the
compass of the French laws for your sake.”

“But, your excellency,” replied Bertuccio hesitatingly, “did not the
Abbé Busoni, who heard my confession in the prison at Nîmes, tell you
that I had a heavy burden upon my conscience?”

“I have related it but once, and that was to the Abbé Busoni. Such
things,” continued Bertuccio, shaking his head, “are only related under
the seal of confession.”

“No, monsieur, I swear to you, by my hopes of salvation, I will tell
you all, for the Abbé Busoni himself only knew a part of my secret;
but, I pray you, go away from that plane-tree. The moon is just
bursting through the clouds, and there, standing where you do, and
wrapped in that cloak that conceals your figure, you remind me of M. de
Villefort.”

“I thought the Abbé Busoni had told your excellency.”

“The second was the crime of which you were accused when you asked for
a confessor, and the Abbé Busoni came to visit you at your request in
the prison at Nîmes.”

“‘No, monsieur; but it appears that in prison he made the acquaintance
of a rich Englishman, and as in prison he fell sick, and Dantès took
the same care of him as if he had been his brother, the Englishman,
when he was set free, gave this stone to Dantès, who, less fortunate,
died, and, in his turn, left it to us, and charged the excellent abbé,
who was here this morning, to deliver it.’

‘Forty thousand,’ cried La Carconte; ‘we will not part with it for that
sum. The abbé told us it was worth 50,000 without the setting.’

“‘What was the abbé’s name?’ asked the indefatigable questioner.

“‘The Abbé Busoni,’ said La Carconte.

“No, your excellency, I had never heard of him before, and never but
once afterwards, and that was from the Abbé Busoni himself, when I saw
him in the prison at Nîmes.”

“‘Yes,’ continued the jeweller; ‘but someone else will not be so easy
as I am, or content himself with the same story. It is not natural that
a man like you should possess such a diamond. He will inform against
you. You will have to find the Abbé Busoni; and abbés who give diamonds
worth two thousand louis are rare. The law would seize it, and put you
in prison; if at the end of three or four months you are set at
liberty, the ring will be lost, or a false stone, worth three francs,
will be given you, instead of a diamond worth 50,000 or perhaps 55,000
francs; from which you must allow that one runs considerable risk in
purchasing.’

“‘Let him have it—let him have it,’ she said. ‘If he returns to
Beaucaire without the diamond, he will inform against us, and, as he
says, who knows if we shall ever again see the Abbé Busoni?—in all
probability we shall never see him.’

“‘The abbé told me it was worth 50,000 francs,’ muttered Caderousse.

“‘Thank you,’ replied the jeweller, ‘it must be getting late, and I
must return to Beaucaire—my wife will be getting uneasy.’ He drew out
his watch, and exclaimed, ‘_Morbleu!_ nearly nine o’clock—why, I shall
not get back to Beaucaire before midnight! Good-night, my friends. If
the Abbé Busoni should by any accident return, think of me.’

“I had been tracked by a customs-officer, who had lost sight of me near
the tavern; feeling certain that I intended to pass the night there, he
had returned to summon his comrades, who just arrived in time to hear
the report of the pistol, and to take me in the midst of such
circumstantial proofs of my guilt as rendered all hopes of proving my
innocence utterly futile. One only chance was left me, that of
beseeching the magistrate before whom I was taken to cause every
inquiry to be made for the Abbé Busoni, who had stopped at the inn of
the Pont du Gard on that morning.

“If Caderousse had invented the story relative to the diamond, and
there existed no such person as the Abbé Busoni, then, indeed, I was
lost past redemption, or, at least, my life hung upon the feeble chance
of Caderousse himself being apprehended and confessing the whole truth.

“Two months passed away in hopeless expectation on my part, while I
must do the magistrate the justice to say that he used every means to
obtain information of the person I declared could exculpate me if he
would. Caderousse still evaded all pursuit, and I had resigned myself
to what seemed my inevitable fate. My trial was to come on at the
approaching assizes; when, on the 8th of September—that is to say,
precisely three months and five days after the events which had
perilled my life—the Abbé Busoni, whom I never ventured to believe I
should see, presented himself at the prison doors, saying he understood
one of the prisoners wished to speak to him; he added, that having
learned at Marseilles the particulars of my imprisonment, he hastened
to comply with my desire.

“I had speedy proofs that the excellent abbé was engaged in my behalf,
for the rigors of my imprisonment were alleviated by many trifling
though acceptable indulgences, and I was told that my trial was to be
postponed to the assizes following those now being held.

“And then it was, I presume,” said Monte Cristo “that you came to me as
the bearer of a letter from the Abbé Busoni?”

“It was, your excellency; the benevolent abbé took an evident interest
in all that concerned me.

“Everything is possible,” said Monte Cristo, rising from the bench on
which he had been sitting; “even,” he added in an inaudible voice,
“even that the procureur be not dead. The Abbé Busoni did right to send
you to me,” he went on in his ordinary tone, “and you have done well in
relating to me the whole of your history, as it will prevent my forming
any erroneous opinions concerning you in future. As for that Benedetto,
who so grossly belied his name, have you never made any effort to trace
out whither he has gone, or what has become of him?”

“My good friend, I can only repeat the words addressed to you by the
Abbé Busoni. Villefort merited punishment for what he had done to you,
and, perhaps, to others. Benedetto, if still living, will become the
instrument of divine retribution in some way or other, and then be duly
punished in his turn. As far as you yourself are concerned, I see but
one point in which you are really guilty. Ask yourself, wherefore,
after rescuing the infant from its living grave, you did not restore it
to its mother? There was the crime, Bertuccio—that was where you became
really culpable.”

“In order to bring this conversation to a fitting termination (the last
we shall ever hold upon this subject), I will repeat to you some words
I have heard from the lips of the Abbé Busoni. For all evils there are
two remedies—time and silence. And now leave me, Monsieur Bertuccio, to
walk alone here in the garden. The very circumstances which inflict on
you, as a principal in the tragic scene enacted here, such painful
emotions, are to me, on the contrary, a source of something like
contentment, and serve but to enhance the value of this dwelling in my
estimation. The chief beauty of trees consists in the deep shadow of
their umbrageous boughs, while fancy pictures a moving multitude of
shapes and forms flitting and passing beneath that shade. Here I have a
garden laid out in such a way as to afford the fullest scope for the
imagination, and furnished with thickly grown trees, beneath whose
leafy screen a visionary like myself may conjure up phantoms at will.
This to me, who expected but to find a blank enclosure surrounded by a
straight wall, is, I assure you, a most agreeable surprise. I have no
fear of ghosts, and I have never heard it said that so much harm had
been done by the dead during six thousand years as is wrought by the
living in a single day. Retire within, Bertuccio, and tranquillize your
mind. Should your confessor be less indulgent to you in your dying
moments than you found the Abbé Busoni, send for me, if I am still on
earth, and I will soothe your ears with words that shall effectually
calm and soothe your parting soul ere it goes forth to traverse the
ocean called eternity.”

“Ah, but madame, does mankind ever lose anything? The arts change about
and make a tour of the world; things take a different name, and the
vulgar do not follow them—that is all; but there is always the same
result. Poisons act particularly on some organ or another—one on the
stomach, another on the brain, another on the intestines. Well, the
poison brings on a cough, the cough an inflammation of the lungs, or
some other complaint catalogued in the book of science, which, however,
by no means precludes it from being decidedly mortal; and if it were
not, would be sure to become so, thanks to the remedies applied by
foolish doctors, who are generally bad chemists, and which will act in
favor of or against the malady, as you please; and then there is a
human being killed according to all the rules of art and skill, and of
whom justice learns nothing, as was said by a terrible chemist of my
acquaintance, the worthy Abbé Adelmonte of Taormina, in Sicily, who has
studied these national phenomena very profoundly.”

“Were objects of art, madame, and nothing more,” replied the count. “Do
you suppose that the real _savant_ addresses himself stupidly to the
mere individual? By no means. Science loves eccentricities, leaps and
bounds, trials of strength, fancies, if I may be allowed so to term
them. Thus, for instance, the excellent Abbé Adelmonte, of whom I spoke
just now, made in this way some marvellous experiments.”

“Yes; I will mention one to you. He had a remarkably fine garden, full
of vegetables, flowers, and fruit. From amongst these vegetables he
selected the most simple—a cabbage, for instance. For three days he
watered this cabbage with a distillation of arsenic; on the third, the
cabbage began to droop and turn yellow. At that moment he cut it. In
the eyes of everybody it seemed fit for table, and preserved its
wholesome appearance. It was only poisoned to the Abbé Adelmonte. He
then took the cabbage to the room where he had rabbits—for the Abbé
Adelmonte had a collection of rabbits, cats, and guinea-pigs, fully as
fine as his collection of vegetables, flowers, and fruit. Well, the
Abbé Adelmonte took a rabbit, and made it eat a leaf of the cabbage.
The rabbit died. What magistrate would find, or even venture to
insinuate, anything against this? What procureur has ever ventured to
draw up an accusation against M. Magendie or M. Flourens, in
consequence of the rabbits, cats, and guinea-pigs they have killed?—not
one. So, then, the rabbit dies, and justice takes no notice. This
rabbit dead, the Abbé Adelmonte has its entrails taken out by his cook
and thrown on the dunghill; on this dunghill is a hen, who, pecking
these intestines, is in her turn taken ill, and dies next day. At the
moment when she is struggling in the convulsions of death, a vulture is
flying by (there are a good many vultures in Adelmonte’s country); this
bird darts on the dead fowl, and carries it away to a rock, where it
dines off its prey. Three days afterwards, this poor vulture, which has
been very much indisposed since that dinner, suddenly feels very giddy
while flying aloft in the clouds, and falls heavily into a fish-pond.
The pike, eels, and carp eat greedily always, as everybody knows—well,
they feast on the vulture. Now suppose that next day, one of these
eels, or pike, or carp, poisoned at the fourth remove, is served up at
your table. Well, then, your guest will be poisoned at the fifth
remove, and die, at the end of eight or ten days, of pains in the
intestines, sickness, or abscess of the pylorus. The doctors open the
body and say with an air of profound learning, ‘The subject has died of
a tumor on the liver, or of typhoid fever!’”

“A skilful preparation of my friend’s the worthy Abbé Adelmonte, who
taught me the use of it.”

“Most assuredly,” responded Madame de Villefort in the same tone. “As
for me, so nervous, and so subject to fainting fits, I should require a
Doctor Adelmonte to invent for me some means of breathing freely and
tranquillizing my mind, in the fear I have of dying some fine day of
suffocation. In the meanwhile, as the thing is difficult to find in
France, and your abbé is not probably disposed to make a journey to
Paris on my account, I must continue to use Monsieur Planche’s
anti-spasmodics; and mint and Hoffman’s drops are among my favorite
remedies. Here are some lozenges which I have made up on purpose; they
are compounded doubly strong.”

“By the excellent Abbé Busoni?”

“Yes, in so many words; and it must be so, for the abbé knows correctly
the amount of all the largest fortunes in Europe.”

“No, indeed; certainly not; a good man, a man holding religious office,
as does the Abbé Busoni, could not condescend to deceive or play off a
joke; but your excellency has not read all.”

“Certainly; the Abbé Busoni and myself have a small account open
between us. I do not remember if it is exactly 48,000 francs, which I
am still owing him, but I dare say we shall not dispute the difference.
You attached great importance, then, to this postscript, my dear
Monsieur Cavalcanti?”

“I must explain to you,” said the major, “that, fully confiding in the
signature of the Abbé Busoni, I had not provided myself with any other
funds; so that if this resource had failed me, I should have found
myself very unpleasantly situated in Paris.”

“I do not at all wonder at it—one cannot think of everything; but,
happily, the Abbé Busoni thought for you.”

“By the way,” said the major, “you know I have only the 2,000 francs
which the Abbé Busoni sent me; this sum I have expended upon travelling
expenses, and——”

“I thought you might want it to show the Abbé Busoni.”

“From a certain Abbé Busoni.”

“And of whom you have no more knowledge than I of the Abbé Busoni?”

“Can you imagine,” said Monte Cristo, “some Othello or Abbé de Ganges,
one stormy, dark night, descending these stairs step by step, carrying
a load, which he wishes to hide from the sight of man, if not from
God?”

Monte Cristo was at home; only he was engaged with someone and begged
Danglars to wait for a moment in the drawing-room. While the banker was
waiting in the anteroom, the door opened, and a man dressed as an abbé
and doubtless more familiar with the house than he was, came in and
instead of waiting, merely bowed, passed on to the farther apartments,
and disappeared.

“Pardon me,” said he, “my dear baron, but one of my friends, the Abbé
Busoni, whom you perhaps saw pass by, has just arrived in Paris; not
having seen him for a long time, I could not make up my mind to leave
him sooner, so I hope this will be sufficient reason for my having made
you wait.”

“That is another thing: he was recommended to me by a good abbé, who
may be deceived. Give him a direct invitation, but do not ask me to
present him. If he were afterwards to marry Mademoiselle Danglars, you
would accuse me of intrigue, and would be challenging me,—besides, I
may not be there myself.”

“The person called the Count of Monte Cristo is an intimate
acquaintance of Lord Wilmore, a rich foreigner, who is sometimes seen
in Paris and who is there at this moment; he is also known to the Abbé
Busoni, a Sicilian priest, of high repute in the East, where he has
done much good.”

“The abbé, who was in Paris only for a month, inhabited a small
two-storied house behind Saint-Sulpice; there were two rooms on each
floor and he was the only tenant. The two lower rooms consisted of a
dining-room, with a table, chairs, and side-board of walnut, and a
wainscoted parlor, without ornaments, carpet, or timepiece. It was
evident that the abbé limited himself to objects of strict necessity.
He preferred to use the sitting-room upstairs, which was more library
than parlor, and was furnished with theological books and parchments,
in which he delighted to bury himself for months at a time, according
to his valet de chambre. His valet looked at the visitors through a
sort of wicket; and if their faces were unknown to him or displeased
him, he replied that the abbé was not in Paris, an answer which
satisfied most persons, because the abbé was known to be a great
traveller. Besides, whether at home or not, whether in Paris or Cairo,
the abbé always left something to give away, which the valet
distributed through this wicket in his master’s name. The other room
near the library was a bedroom. A bed without curtains, four armchairs,
and a couch, covered with yellow Utrecht velvet, composed, with a
_prie-Dieu_, all its furniture.

The day after this important information had been given to the king’s
attorney, a man alighted from a carriage at the corner of the Rue
Férou, and rapping at an olive-green door, asked if the Abbé Busoni
were within.

“I might not always be content with that answer,” replied the visitor,
“for I come from one to whom everyone must be at home. But have the
kindness to give the Abbé Busoni——”

“Is the abbé at home?” asked he.

“Yes; he is at work in his library, but he expects you, sir,” replied
the valet. The stranger ascended a rough staircase, and before a table,
illumined by a lamp whose light was concentrated by a large shade while
the rest of the apartment was in partial darkness, he perceived the
abbé in a monk’s dress, with a cowl on his head such as was used by
learned men of the Middle Ages.

“Have I the honor of addressing the Abbé Busoni?” asked the visitor.

“Yes, sir,” replied the abbé; “and you are the person whom M. de
Boville, formerly an inspector of prisons, sends to me from the prefect
of police?”

The abbé replaced the large spectacles, which covered not only his eyes
but his temples, and sitting down motioned to his visitor to do the
same. “I am at your service, sir,” said the abbé, with a marked Italian
accent.

“The mission with which I am charged, sir,” replied the visitor,
speaking with hesitation, “is a confidential one on the part of him who
fulfils it, and him by whom he is employed.” The abbé bowed. “Your
probity,” replied the stranger, “is so well known to the prefect that
he wishes as a magistrate to ascertain from you some particulars
connected with the public safety, to ascertain which I am deputed to
see you. It is hoped that no ties of friendship or humane consideration
will induce you to conceal the truth.”

At this moment the abbé pressed down his side of the shade and so
raised it on the other, throwing a bright light on the stranger’s face,
while his own remained obscured.

“Excuse me, abbé,” said the envoy of the prefect of the police, “but
the light tries my eyes very much.” The abbé lowered the shade.

“However,” replied the abbé, with an affable smile, “when that report
is in accordance with the truth, everybody must believe it, the police
as well as all the rest.”

“It is a magnificent charity.” Having said this, the abbé bowed to
imply he wished to pursue his studies.

The visitor either understood the abbé’s meaning, or had no more
questions to ask; he arose, and the abbé accompanied him to the door.

The abbé once more bowed as he opened the door, the stranger bowed and
took his leave, and the carriage conveyed him straight to the house of
M. de Villefort. An hour afterwards the carriage was again ordered, and
this time it went to the Rue Fontaine-Saint-Georges, and stopped at No.
5, where Lord Wilmore lived. The stranger had written to Lord Wilmore,
requesting an interview, which the latter had fixed for ten o’clock. As
the envoy of the prefect of police arrived ten minutes before ten, he
was told that Lord Wilmore, who was precision and punctuality
personified, was not yet come in, but that he would be sure to return
as the clock struck.

Then began the questions, which were similar to those which had been
addressed to the Abbé Busoni. But as Lord Wilmore, in the character of
the count’s enemy, was less restrained in his answers, they were more
numerous; he described the youth of Monte Cristo, who he said, at ten
years of age, entered the service of one of the petty sovereigns of
India who make war on the English. It was there Wilmore had first met
him and fought against him; and in that war Zaccone had been taken
prisoner, sent to England, and consigned to the hulks, whence he had
escaped by swimming. Then began his travels, his duels, his caprices;
then the insurrection in Greece broke out, and he had served in the
Grecian ranks. While in that service he had discovered a silver mine in
the mountains of Thessaly, but he had been careful to conceal it from
everyone. After the battle of Navarino, when the Greek government was
consolidated, he asked of King Otho a mining grant for that district,
which was given him. Hence that immense fortune, which, in Lord
Wilmore’s opinion, possibly amounted to one or two millions per
annum,—a precarious fortune, which might be momentarily lost by the
failure of the mine.

“But why should he wish to enlighten himself upon the subject?” asked
Villefort, after a moment’s reflection, “what interest can this M. de
Monte Cristo or M. Zaccone,—son of a shipowner of Malta, discoverer of
a mine in Thessaly, now visiting Paris for the first time,—what
interest, I say, can he take in discovering a gloomy, mysterious, and
useless fact like this? However, among all the incoherent details given
to me by the Abbé Busoni and by Lord Wilmore, by that friend and that
enemy, one thing appears certain and clear in my opinion—that in no
period, in no case, in no circumstance, could there have been any
contact between him and me.”

It was an order the count had just given, for immediately Ali went
noiselessly, and returned, bearing a black dress and a three-cornered
hat. Meanwhile Monte Cristo had rapidly taken off his greatcoat,
waistcoat, and shirt, and one might distinguish by the glimmering
through the open panel that he wore a pliant tunic of steel mail, of
which the last in France, where daggers are no longer dreaded, was worn
by King Louis XVI., who feared the dagger at his breast, and whose head
was cleft with a hatchet. The tunic soon disappeared under a long
cassock, as did his hair under a priest’s wig; the three-cornered hat
over this effectually transformed the count into an abbé.

“The Abbé Busoni!” exclaimed Caderousse; and, not knowing how this
strange apparition could have entered when he had bolted the doors, he
let fall his bunch of keys, and remained motionless and stupefied. The
count placed himself between Caderousse and the window, thus cutting
off from the thief his only chance of retreat.

“The Abbé Busoni!” repeated Caderousse, fixing his haggard gaze on the
count.

“Yes, undoubtedly, the Abbé Busoni himself,” replied Monte Cristo. “And
I am very glad you recognize me, dear M. Caderousse; it proves you have
a good memory, for it must be about ten years since we last met.”

“The abbé, the abbé!” murmured he, clenching his fists, and his teeth
chattering.

“So you would rob the Count of Monte Cristo?” continued the false abbé.

“I am alone,” said the abbé, “and I will again have pity on you, and
will let you escape, at the risk of the fresh miseries my weakness may
lead to, if you tell me the truth.”

“Galley-slaves having a nap after dinner! We may well pity the poor
fellows!” said the abbé.

“No, in truth; we parted at Hyères.” And, to give more weight to his
protestation, Caderousse advanced another step towards the abbé, who
remained motionless in his place, as calm as ever, and pursuing his
interrogation.

“You lie,” said the Abbé Busoni, with a tone of irresistible authority.

“You lie,” repeated the abbé a third time, with a still more imperative
tone. Caderousse, terrified, looked at the count. “You have lived on
the money he has given you.”

“Ah, yes,” said the factitious abbé, who began to understand; “and what
name does the young man bear meanwhile?”

Caderousse, awed by the superior power of the abbé, sat down and wrote:

Caderousse wrote the address. The abbé took the note.

“Now go down,” said the abbé, folding his arms. Understanding he had
nothing more to fear from him, Caderousse began to go down. Then the
count brought the taper to the window, that it might be seen in the
Champs-Élysées that a man was getting out of the window while another
held a light.

Ali obeyed, leaving the abbé alone with Caderousse, who had not yet
revived.

“I have sent for one,” replied the abbé.

“Two drops more would kill you,” replied the abbé.

“You will relate all the rest, reverend sir; you will say he calls
himself Andrea Cavalcanti. He lodges at the Hôtel des Princes. Oh, I am
dying!” He again fainted. The abbé made him smell the contents of the
phial, and he again opened his eyes. His desire for revenge had not
forsaken him.

“Patience,” said the abbé, in a tone which made the dying man shudder;
“have patience!”

“Besides,” said the abbé, “God is merciful to all, as he has been to
you; he is first a father, then a judge.”

“Listen,” said the abbé, extending his hand over the wounded man, as if
to command him to believe; “this is what the God in whom, on your
death-bed, you refuse to believe, has done for you—he gave you health,
strength, regular employment, even friends—a life, in fact, which a man
might enjoy with a calm conscience. Instead of improving these gifts,
rarely granted so abundantly, this has been your course—you have given
yourself up to sloth and drunkenness, and in a fit of intoxication have
ruined your best friend.”

“Listen,” continued the abbé. “When you had betrayed your friend, God
began not to strike, but to warn you. Poverty overtook you. You had
already passed half your life in coveting that which you might have
honorably acquired; and already you contemplated crime under the excuse
of want, when God worked a miracle in your behalf, sending you, by my
hands, a fortune—brilliant, indeed, for you, who had never possessed
any. But this unexpected, unhoped-for, unheard-of fortune sufficed you
no longer when you once possessed it; you wished to double it, and
how?—by a murder! You succeeded, and then God snatched it from you, and
brought you to justice.”

“Silence,” said the abbé; “you will force the last drop of blood from
your veins. What! you do not believe in God when he is striking you
dead? you will not believe in him, who requires but a prayer, a word, a
tear, and he will forgive? God, who might have directed the assassin’s
dagger so as to end your career in a moment, has given you this quarter
of an hour for repentance. Reflect, then, wretched man, and repent.”

“Well, the abbé—the Abbé Busoni.” Monte Cristo took off the wig which
disfigured him, and let fall his black hair, which added so much to the
beauty of his pallid features.

“I am neither the Abbé Busoni nor Lord Wilmore,” said Monte Cristo;
“think again,—do you not recollect me?”

Ten minutes afterwards the surgeon and the procureur arrived, the one
accompanied by the porter, the other by Ali, and were received by the
Abbé Busoni, who was praying by the side of the corpse.

The daring attempt to rob the count was the topic of conversation
throughout Paris for the next fortnight. The dying man had signed a
deposition declaring Benedetto to be the assassin. The police had
orders to make the strictest search for the murderer. Caderousse’s
knife, dark lantern, bunch of keys, and clothing, excepting the
waistcoat, which could not be found, were deposited at the registry;
the corpse was conveyed to the morgue. The count told everyone that
this adventure had happened during his absence at Auteuil, and that he
only knew what was related by the Abbé Busoni, who that evening, by
mere chance, had requested to pass the night in his house, to examine
some valuable books in his library.

“What?” said he to himself, while the lamp and the wax lights were
nearly burnt out, and the servants were waiting impatiently in the
anteroom; “what? this edifice which I have been so long preparing,
which I have reared with so much care and toil, is to be crushed by a
single touch, a word, a breath! Yes, this self, of whom I thought so
much, of whom I was so proud, who had appeared so worthless in the
dungeons of the Château d’If, and whom I had succeeded in making so
great, will be but a lump of clay tomorrow. Alas, it is not the death
of the body I regret; for is not the destruction of the vital
principle, the repose to which everything is tending, to which every
unhappy being aspires,—is not this the repose of matter after which I
so long sighed, and which I was seeking to attain by the painful
process of starvation when Faria appeared in my dungeon? What is death
for me? One step farther into rest,—two, perhaps, into silence. No, it
is not existence, then, that I regret, but the ruin of projects so
slowly carried out, so laboriously framed. Providence is now opposed to
them, when I most thought it would be propitious. It is not God’s will
that they should be accomplished. This burden, almost as heavy as a
world, which I had raised, and I had thought to bear to the end, was
too great for my strength, and I was compelled to lay it down in the
middle of my career. Oh, shall I then, again become a fatalist, whom
fourteen years of despair and ten of hope had rendered a believer in
Providence?

“You are completely mistaken, sir,” said Monte Cristo coldly, who felt
the perfidious manœuvre of the young man, and understood the bearing of
his words; “you only acquired my protection after the influence and
fortune of your father had been ascertained; for, after all, who
procured for me, who had never seen either you or your illustrious
father, the pleasure of your acquaintance?—two of my good friends, Lord
Wilmore and the Abbé Busoni. What encouraged me not to become your
surety, but to patronize you?—your father’s name, so well known in
Italy and so highly honored. Personally, I do not know you.”

“The nearest,” said the district doctor, “is a good Italian abbé, who
lives next door to you. Shall I call on him as I pass?”

“This is the abbé of whom I spoke,” said the doctor to d’Avrigny.
D’Avrigny accosted the priest.

D’Avrigny took the priest’s hand, and without meeting Villefort, who
was engaged in his study, they reached Valentine’s room, which on the
following night was to be occupied by the undertakers. On entering the
room, Noirtier’s eyes met those of the abbé, and no doubt he read some
particular expression in them, for he remained in the room. D’Avrigny
recommended the attention of the priest to the living as well as to the
dead, and the abbé promised to devote his prayers to Valentine and his
attentions to Noirtier.

During the evening two men, engaged for the purpose, had carried
Noirtier from Valentine’s room into his own, and contrary to all
expectation there was no difficulty in withdrawing him from his child.
The Abbé Busoni had watched till daylight, and then left without
calling anyone. D’Avrigny returned about eight o’clock in the morning;
he met Villefort on his way to Noirtier’s room, and accompanied him to
see how the old man had slept. They found him in the large armchair,
which served him for a bed, enjoying a calm, nay, almost a smiling
sleep. They both stood in amazement at the door.

We remember that the Abbé Busoni remained alone with Noirtier in the
chamber of death, and that the old man and the priest were the sole
guardians of the young girl’s body. Perhaps it was the Christian
exhortations of the abbé, perhaps his kind charity, perhaps his
persuasive words, which had restored the courage of Noirtier, for ever
since he had conversed with the priest his violent despair had yielded
to a calm resignation which surprised all who knew his excessive
affection for Valentine.

He descended the little staircase with which we are acquainted, and
entered Noirtier’s room. The old man appeared to be listening
attentively and as affectionately as his infirmities would allow to the
Abbé Busoni, who looked cold and calm, as usual. Villefort, perceiving
the abbé, passed his hand across his brow. The past came to him like
one of those waves whose wrath foams fiercer than the others.

He recollected the call he had made upon him after the dinner at
Auteuil, and then the visit the abbé had himself paid to his house on
the day of Valentine’s death.

“Good heavens!” exclaimed Villefort, stepping back fearfully, “surely
that is not the voice of the Abbé Busoni!”

“No!” The abbé threw off his wig, shook his head, and his hair, no
longer confined, fell in black masses around his manly face.

The count inquired whether any of the ancient jailers were still there;
but they had all been pensioned, or had passed on to some other
employment. The concierge who attended him had only been there since
1830. He visited his own dungeon. He again beheld the dull light vainly
endeavoring to penetrate the narrow opening. His eyes rested upon the
spot where had stood his bed, since then removed, and behind the bed
the new stones indicated where the breach made by the Abbé Faria had
been. Monte Cristo felt his limbs tremble; he seated himself upon a log
of wood.

Monte Cristo raised his eyes, but he could not see the heavens; there
was a stone veil between him and the firmament. He thought that there
had been no less thick a veil before the eyes of those to whom Faria
offered the treasures.

“Oh, it must have been the young man, certainly, for he was strong and
industrious, while the abbé was aged and weak; besides, his mind was
too vacillating to allow him to carry out an idea.”

“Yes, especially if you will show me the poor abbé’s room.”

“Yes; No. 27.” repeated the count, who seemed to hear the voice of the
abbé answering him in those very words through the wall when asked his
name.

“Follow me, sir;” and without ascending the stairs the guide conducted
him by a subterraneous passage to another entrance. There, again, Monte
Cristo was assailed by a multitude of thoughts. The first thing that
met his eye was the meridian, drawn by the abbé on the wall, by which
he calculated the time; then he saw the remains of the bed on which the
poor prisoner had died. The sight of this, instead of exciting the
anguish experienced by the count in the dungeon, filled his heart with
a soft and grateful sentiment, and tears fell from his eyes.

“This is where the mad abbé was kept, sir, and that is where the young
man entered;” and the guide pointed to the opening, which had remained
unclosed. “From the appearance of the stone,” he continued, “a learned
gentleman discovered that the prisoners might have communicated
together for ten years. Poor things! Those must have been ten weary
years.”

“Ah,” cried Monte Cristo, remembering the abbé’s two hiding-places.

Monte Cristo shuddered, and arose. The concierge held out the strips of
cloth upon which the Abbé Faria had spread the riches of his mind. The
manuscript was the great work by the Abbé Faria upon the kingdoms of
Italy. The count seized it hastily, his eyes immediately fell upon the
epigraph, and he read: