VOLUME FOUR
Chapter 74. The Villefort Family Vault
Chapter 75. A Signed Statement
Chapter 76. Progress of Cavalcanti the Younger
Chapter 77. Haydée
Chapter 78. We hear From Yanina
Chapter 79. The Lemonade
Chapter 80. The Accusation
Chapter 81. The Room of the Retired Baker
Chapter 82. The Burglary
Chapter 83. The Hand of God
Chapter 84. Beauchamp
Chapter 85. The Journey
Chapter 86. The Trial
Chapter 87. The Challenge
Chapter 88. The Insult
Chapter 89. The Night
Chapter 90. The Meeting
Chapter 91. Mother and Son
Chapter 92. The Suicide
Chapter 93. Valentine
Chapter 94. Maximilian’s Avowal
Chapter 95. Father and Daughter

VOLUME FIVE
Chapter 96. The Contract
Chapter 97. The Departure for Belgium
Chapter 98. The Bell and Bottle Tavern
Chapter 99. The Law
Chapter 100. The Apparition
Chapter 101. Locusta
Chapter 102. Valentine
Chapter 103. Maximilian
Chapter 104. Danglars’ Signature
Chapter 105. The Cemetery of Père-Lachaise
Chapter 106. Dividing the Proceeds
Chapter 107. The Lions’ Den
Chapter 108. The Judge
Chapter 109. The Assizes
Chapter 110. The Indictment
Chapter 111. Expiation
Chapter 112. The Departure
Chapter 113. The Past
Chapter 114. Peppino
Chapter 115. Luigi Vampa’s Bill of Fare
Chapter 116. The Pardon
Chapter 117. The Fifth of October

Edward endured the accident with miraculous courage—he did not utter a
single cry, but fell lifeless into my arms; nor did a tear fall from
his eyes after it was over. I doubt not you will consider these praises
the result of blind maternal affection, but there is a soul of iron in
that delicate, fragile body. Valentine sends many affectionate
remembrances to your dear Eugénie. I embrace you with all my heart.

“Sir,” continued Villefort, “there is something to fear besides death,
old age, and madness. For instance, there is apoplexy—that
lightning-stroke which strikes but does not destroy you, and yet which
brings everything to an end. You are still yourself as now, and yet you
are yourself no longer; you who, like Ariel, verge on the angelic, are
but an inert mass, which, like Caliban, verges on the brutal; and this
is called in human tongues, as I tell you, neither more nor less than
apoplexy. Come, if so you will, count, and continue this conversation
at my house, any day you may be willing to see an adversary capable of
understanding and anxious to refute you, and I will show you my father,
M. Noirtier de Villefort, one of the most fiery Jacobins of the French
Revolution; that is to say, he had the most remarkable audacity,
seconded by a most powerful organization—a man who has not, perhaps,
like yourself seen all the kingdoms of the earth, but who has helped to
overturn one of the greatest; in fact, a man who believed himself, like
you, one of the envoys, not of God, but of a supreme being; not of
Providence, but of fate. Well, sir, the rupture of a blood-vessel on
the lobe of the brain has destroyed all this, not in a day, not in an
hour, but in a second. M. Noirtier, who, on the previous night, was the
old Jacobin, the old senator, the old Carbonaro, laughing at the
guillotine, the cannon, and the dagger—M. Noirtier, playing with
revolutions—M. Noirtier, for whom France was a vast chess-board, from
which pawns, rooks, knights, and queens were to disappear, so that the
king was checkmated—M. Noirtier, the redoubtable, was the next morning
_poor M. Noirtier_, the helpless old man, at the tender mercies of the
weakest creature in the household, that is, his grandchild, Valentine;
a dumb and frozen carcass, in fact, living painlessly on, that time may
be given for his frame to decompose without his consciousness of its
decay.”

“It would have been so unquestionably, had not God given me so large a
compensation. In contrast with the old man, who is dragging his way to
the tomb, are two children just entering into life—Valentine, the
daughter by my first wife—Mademoiselle Renée de Saint-Méran—and Edward,
the boy whose life you have this day saved.”

“Don’t be alarmed, Valentine—it is I!”

“Dearest Valentine,” said the young man, “the difference between our
respective stations makes me fear to offend you by speaking of my love,
but yet I cannot find myself in your presence without longing to pour
forth my soul, and tell you how fondly I adore you. If it be but to
carry away with me the recollection of such sweet moments, I could even
thank you for chiding me, for it leaves me a gleam of hope, that if you
did not expect me (and that indeed would be worse than vanity to
suppose), at least I was in your thoughts. You asked me the cause of my
being late, and why I come disguised. I will candidly explain the
reason of both, and I trust to your goodness to pardon me. I have
chosen a trade.”

“Heaven keep me from jesting with that which is far dearer to me than
life itself! But listen to me, Valentine, and I will tell you all about
it. I became weary of ranging fields and scaling walls, and seriously
alarmed at the idea suggested by you, that if caught hovering about
here your father would very likely have me sent to prison as a thief.
That would compromise the honor of the French army, to say nothing of
the fact that the continual presence of a captain of Spahis in a place
where no warlike projects could be supposed to account for it might
well create surprise; so I have become a gardener, and, consequently,
adopted the costume of my calling.”

“Simply, that having ascertained that the piece of ground on which I
stand was to let, I made application for it, was readily accepted by
the proprietor, and am now master of this fine crop of lucern. Think of
that, Valentine! There is nothing now to prevent my building myself a
little hut on my plantation, and residing not twenty yards from you.
Only imagine what happiness that would afford me. I can scarcely
contain myself at the bare idea. Such felicity seems above all price—as
a thing impossible and unattainable. But would you believe that I
purchase all this delight, joy, and happiness, for which I would
cheerfully have surrendered ten years of my life, at the small cost of
500 francs per annum, paid quarterly? Henceforth we have nothing to
fear. I am on my own ground, and have an undoubted right to place a
ladder against the wall, and to look over when I please, without having
any apprehensions of being taken off by the police as a suspicious
character. I may also enjoy the precious privilege of assuring you of
my fond, faithful, and unalterable affection, whenever you visit your
favorite bower, unless, indeed, it offends your pride to listen to
professions of love from the lips of a poor workingman, clad in a
blouse and cap.”

A faint cry of mingled pleasure and surprise escaped from the lips of
Valentine, who almost instantly said, in a saddened tone, as though
some envious cloud darkened the joy which illumined her heart:

“How can you for an instant entertain so unworthy a thought, dear
Valentine? Have I not, from the first blessed hour of our acquaintance,
schooled all my words and actions to your sentiments and ideas? And you
have, I am sure, the fullest confidence in my honor. When you spoke to
me of experiencing a vague and indefinite sense of coming danger, I
placed myself blindly and devotedly at your service, asking no other
reward than the pleasure of being useful to you; and have I ever since,
by word or look, given you cause of regret for having selected me from
the numbers that would willingly have sacrificed their lives for you?
You told me, my dear Valentine, that you were engaged to M. d’Épinay,
and that your father was resolved upon completing the match, and that
from his will there was no appeal, as M. de Villefort was never known
to change a determination once formed. I kept in the background, as you
wished, and waited, not for the decision of your heart or my own, but
hoping that Providence would graciously interpose in our behalf, and
order events in our favor. But what cared I for delays or difficulties,
Valentine, as long as you confessed that you loved me, and took pity on
me? If you will only repeat that avowal now and then, I can endure
anything.”

“I will not admit that word,” returned the young man; “it is at once
cruel and unjust. Is it possible to find a more submissive slave than
myself? You have permitted me to converse with you from time to time,
Valentine, but forbidden my ever following you in your walks or
elsewhere—have I not obeyed? And since I found means to enter this
enclosure to exchange a few words with you through this gate—to be
close to you without really seeing you—have I ever asked so much as to
touch the hem of your gown or tried to pass this barrier which is but a
trifle to one of my youth and strength? Never has a complaint or a
murmur escaped me. I have been bound by my promises as rigidly as any
knight of olden times. Come, come, dearest Valentine, confess that what
I say is true, lest I be tempted to call you unjust.”

“It is true,” said Valentine, as she passed the end of her slender
fingers through a small opening in the planks, and permitted Maximilian
to press his lips to them, “and you are a true and faithful friend; but
still you acted from motives of self-interest, my dear Maximilian, for
you well knew that from the moment in which you had manifested an
opposite spirit all would have been ended between us. You promised to
bestow on me the friendly affection of a brother. For I have no friend
but yourself upon earth, who am neglected and forgotten by my father,
harassed and persecuted by my stepmother, and left to the sole
companionship of a paralyzed and speechless old man, whose withered
hand can no longer press mine, and who can speak to me with the eye
alone, although there still lingers in his heart the warmest tenderness
for his poor grandchild. Oh, how bitter a fate is mine, to serve either
as a victim or an enemy to all who are stronger than myself, while my
only friend and supporter is a living corpse! Indeed, indeed,
Maximilian, I am very miserable, and if you love me it must be out of
pity.”

“Valentine,” replied the young man, deeply affected, “I will not say
you are all I love in the world, for I dearly prize my sister and
brother-in-law; but my affection for them is calm and tranquil, in no
manner resembling what I feel for you. When I think of you my heart
beats fast, the blood burns in my veins, and I can hardly breathe; but
I solemnly promise you to restrain all this ardor, this fervor and
intensity of feeling, until you yourself shall require me to render
them available in serving or assisting you. M. Franz is not expected to
return home for a year to come, I am told; in that time many favorable
and unforeseen chances may befriend us. Let us, then, hope for the
best; hope is so sweet a comforter. Meanwhile, Valentine, while
reproaching me with selfishness, think a little what you have been to
me—the beautiful but cold resemblance of a marble Venus. What promise
of future reward have you made me for all the submission and obedience
I have evinced?—none whatever. What granted me?—scarcely more. You tell
me of M. Franz d’Épinay, your betrothed lover, and you shrink from the
idea of being his wife; but tell me, Valentine, is there no other
sorrow in your heart? You see me devoted to you, body and soul, my life
and each warm drop that circles round my heart are consecrated to your
service; you know full well that my existence is bound up in yours—that
were I to lose you I would not outlive the hour of such crushing
misery; yet you speak with calmness of the prospect of your being the
wife of another! Oh, Valentine, were I in your place, and did I feel
conscious, as you do, of being worshipped, adored, with such a love as
mine, a hundred times at least should I have passed my hand between
these iron bars, and said, ‘Take this hand, dearest Maximilian, and
believe that, living or dead, I am yours—yours only, and forever!’”

“Dearest, dearest Valentine,” exclaimed he, “forgive me if I have
offended you, and forget the words I spoke if they have unwittingly
caused you pain.”

“Hate you, sweet Valentine,” exclaimed the young man; “how is it
possible for anyone to do that?”

“But why, Valentine, do you persist in anticipating the worst,—why
picture so gloomy a future?”

“Still, consider that although I may not be, strictly speaking, what is
termed an illustrious match for you, I am, for many reasons, not
altogether so much beneath your alliance. The days when such
distinctions were so nicely weighed and considered no longer exist in
France, and the first families of the monarchy have intermarried with
those of the empire. The aristocracy of the lance has allied itself
with the nobility of the cannon. Now I belong to this last-named class;
and certainly my prospects of military preferment are most encouraging
as well as certain. My fortune, though small, is free and unfettered,
and the memory of my late father is respected in our country,
Valentine, as that of the most upright and honorable merchant of the
city; I say our country, because you were born not far from
Marseilles.”

“I fear, Valentine,” replied the lover, “that were she living I should
never have had the happiness of knowing you; you would then have been
too happy to have stooped from your grandeur to bestow a thought on
me.”

“Now it is you who are unjust, Maximilian,” cried Valentine; “but there
is one thing I wish to know.”

“And what is that?” inquired the young man, perceiving that Valentine
hesitated.

“Indeed,” answered Maximilian; “and what did your father say then,
Valentine?”

“The name of M. Noirtier,” interposed Maximilian, “is celebrated
throughout Europe; he was a statesman of high standing, and you may or
may not know, Valentine, that he took a leading part in every
Bonapartist conspiracy set on foot during the restoration of the
Bourbons.”

“Hush,” cried Valentine, suddenly; “someone is coming!” Maximilian
leaped at one bound into his crop of lucern, which he began to pull up
in the most ruthless way, under the pretext of being occupied in
weeding it.

“A visitor?” inquired Valentine, much agitated; “who is it?”

“I will come directly,” cried Valentine aloud.

The name of Monte Cristo sent an electric shock through the young man
on the other side of the iron gate, to whom Valentine’s _“I am coming”_
was the customary signal of farewell.

“What is your sister Valentine doing?” inquired Madame de Villefort of
Edward; “tell someone to bid her come here, that I may have the honor
of introducing her to the count.”

Madame de Villefort stretched out her hand to ring, intending to direct
her waiting-maid to the spot where she would find Valentine, when the
young lady herself entered the apartment. She appeared much dejected;
and any person who considered her attentively might have observed the
traces of recent tears in her eyes.

Valentine, whom we have in the rapid march of our narrative presented
to our readers without formally introducing her, was a tall and
graceful girl of nineteen, with bright chestnut hair, deep blue eyes,
and that reposeful air of quiet distinction which characterized her
mother. Her white and slender fingers, her pearly neck, her cheeks
tinted with varying hues reminded one of the lovely Englishwomen who
have been so poetically compared in their manner to the gracefulness of
a swan.

“Mademoiselle de Villefort, my step-daughter,” said Madame de Villefort
to Monte Cristo, leaning back on her sofa and motioning towards
Valentine with her hand.

“But, madame,” replied the count, continuing the conversation, and
looking by turns at Madame de Villefort and Valentine, “have I not
already had the honor of meeting yourself and mademoiselle before? I
could not help thinking so just now; the idea came over my mind, and as
mademoiselle entered the sight of her was an additional ray of light
thrown on a confused remembrance; excuse the remark.”

“Perhaps the count saw us in Italy,” said Valentine timidly.

“It is strange, but neither do I recollect meeting with you,” observed
Valentine, raising her beautiful eyes to the count.

“It is six o’clock,” said Madame de Villefort, evidently agitated.
“Valentine, will you not go and see if your grandpapa will have his
dinner?”

Valentine rose, and saluting the count, left the apartment without
speaking.

“Oh, madame,” said the count, when Valentine had left the room, “was it
on my account that you sent Mademoiselle de Villefort away?”

“Edward, you naughty boy,” exclaimed Madame de Villefort, snatching the
mutilated book from the urchin’s grasp, “you are positively past
bearing; you really disturb the conversation; go, leave us, and join
your sister Valentine in dear grandpapa Noirtier’s room.”

At length, the long-desired sound was heard, and instead of one figure,
as he had expected, he perceived that two were approaching him. The
delay had been occasioned by a visit from Madame Danglars and Eugénie,
which had been prolonged beyond the time at which Valentine was
expected. That she might not appear to fail in her promise to
Maximilian, she proposed to Mademoiselle Danglars that they should take
a walk in the garden, being anxious to show that the delay, which was
doubtless a cause of vexation to him, was not occasioned by any neglect
on her part. The young man, with the intuitive perception of a lover,
quickly understood the circumstances in which she was involuntarily
placed, and he was comforted. Besides, although she avoided coming
within speaking distance, Valentine arranged so that Maximilian could
see her pass and repass, and each time she went by, she managed,
unperceived by her companion, to cast an expressive look at the young
man, which seemed to say, “Have patience! You see it is not my fault.”

And Maximilian was patient, and employed himself in mentally
contrasting the two girls,—one fair, with soft languishing eyes, a
figure gracefully bending like a weeping willow; the other a brunette,
with a fierce and haughty expression, and as straight as a poplar. It
is unnecessary to state that, in the eyes of the young man, Valentine
did not suffer by the contrast. In about half an hour the girls went
away, and Maximilian understood that Mademoiselle Danglars’ visit had
at last come to an end. In a few minutes Valentine re-entered the
garden alone. For fear that anyone should be observing her return, she
walked slowly; and instead of immediately directing her steps towards
the gate, she seated herself on a bench, and, carefully casting her
eyes around, to convince herself that she was not watched, she
presently arose, and proceeded quickly to join Maximilian.

“Good-evening, Valentine,” said a well-known voice.

“We were having a confidential conversation,” returned Valentine; “she
was owning to me her repugnance to the marriage with M. de Morcerf; and
I, on the other hand, was confessing to her how wretched it made me to
think of marrying M. d’Épinay.”

“Ah, how good you are to say so, Valentine! You possess a quality which
can never belong to Mademoiselle Danglars. It is that indefinable charm
which is to a woman what perfume is to the flower and flavor to the
fruit, for the beauty of either is not the only quality we seek.”

“No, Valentine, I assure you such is not the case. I was observing you
both when you were walking in the garden, and, on my honor, without at
all wishing to depreciate the beauty of Mademoiselle Danglars, I cannot
understand how any man can really love her.”

“I dare say it is something disparaging which you are going to say. It
only proves how little indulgence we may expect from your sex,”
interrupted Valentine.

“She told me that she loved no one,” said Valentine; “that she disliked
the idea of being married; that she would infinitely prefer leading an
independent and unfettered life; and that she almost wished her father
might lose his fortune, that she might become an artist, like her
friend, Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.”

“Well, what does that prove?” asked Valentine.

“Why, you know very well that you are reflecting on yourself,
Valentine.”

“Well, what does it signify, Valentine, so long as I am satisfied, and
feel that even this long and painful suspense is amply repaid by five
minutes of your society, or two words from your lips? And I have also a
deep conviction that heaven would not have created two hearts,
harmonizing as ours do, and almost miraculously brought us together, to
separate us at last.”

“Oh, I shall always love you. What should I care for either riches or
poverty, if my Valentine was near me, and I felt certain that no one
could deprive me of her? But do you not fear that this communication
may relate to your marriage?”

“However it may be, Valentine, you must not be alarmed. I assure you
that, as long as I live, I shall never love anyone else!”

“Monsieur de Morcerf has received a letter from Franz, announcing his
immediate return.” Valentine turned pale, and leaned her hand against
the gate.

“Do not be in such a hurry to do that,” said Valentine, with a sad
smile.

“Dear Valentine, you are a perfect angel, and I am sure I do not know
what I—sabring right and left among the Bedouins—can have done to merit
your being revealed to me, unless, indeed, Heaven took into
consideration the fact that the victims of my sword were infidels. But
tell me what interest Madame de Villefort can have in your remaining
unmarried?”

“Valentine, I have always regarded our love in the light of something
sacred; consequently, I have covered it with the veil of respect, and
hid it in the innermost recesses of my soul. No human being, not even
my sister, is aware of its existence. Valentine, will you permit me to
make a confidant of a friend and reveal to him the love I bear you?”

Valentine started. “A friend, Maximilian; and who is this friend? I
tremble to give my permission.”

“Listen, Valentine. Have you never experienced for anyone that sudden
and irresistible sympathy which made you feel as if the object of it
had been your old and familiar friend, though, in reality, it was the
first time you had ever met? Nay, further, have you never endeavored to
recall the time, place, and circumstances of your former intercourse,
and failing in this attempt, have almost believed that your spirits
must have held converse with each other in some state of being anterior
to the present, and that you are only now occupied in a reminiscence of
the past?”

“Your logic is most powerful, Valentine, but say what you will, I can
never renounce the sentiment which has instinctively taken possession
of my mind. I feel as if it were ordained that this man should be
associated with all the good which the future may have in store for me,
and sometimes it really seems as if his eye was able to see what was to
come, and his hand endowed with the power of directing events according
to his own will.”

“He must be a prophet, then,” said Valentine, smiling.

“Ah,” said Valentine in a mournful tone, “do let me see this man,
Maximilian; he may tell me whether I shall ever be loved sufficiently
to make amends for all I have suffered.”

“Ah,” cried Valentine, “he is too much the friend of Madame de
Villefort ever to be mine.”

“The friend of Madame de Villefort! It cannot be; surely, Valentine,
you are mistaken?”

“If such be the case, my dear Valentine, you must yourself have felt,
or at all events will soon feel, the effects of his presence. He meets
Albert de Morcerf in Italy—it is to rescue him from the hands of the
banditti; he introduces himself to Madame Danglars—it is that he may
give her a royal present; your step-mother and her son pass before his
door—it is that his Nubian may save them from destruction. This man
evidently possesses the power of influencing events, both as regards
men and things. I never saw more simple tastes united to greater
magnificence. His smile is so sweet when he addresses me, that I forget
it ever can be bitter to others. Ah, Valentine, tell me, if he ever
looked on you with one of those sweet smiles? if so, depend on it, you
will be happy.”

“Ah, Valentine, I assure you you are mistaken.”

“If it were otherwise—if he treated me diplomatically—that is to say,
like a man who wishes, by some means or other, to obtain a footing in
the house, so that he may ultimately gain the power of dictating to its
occupants—he would, if it had been but once, have honored me with the
smile which you extol so loudly; but no, he saw that I was unhappy, he
understood that I could be of no use to him, and therefore paid no
attention to me whatever. Who knows but that, in order to please Madame
de Villefort and my father, he may not persecute me by every means in
his power? It is not just that he should despise me so, without any
reason. Ah, forgive me,” said Valentine, perceiving the effect which
her words were producing on Maximilian: “I have done wrong, for I have
given utterance to thoughts concerning that man which I did not even
know existed in my heart. I do not deny the influence of which you
speak, or that I have not myself experienced it, but with me it has
been productive of evil rather than good.”

“Well, Valentine,” said Morrel with a sigh, “we will not discuss the
matter further. I will not make a confidant of him.”

“Alas!” said Valentine, “I see that I have given you pain. I can only
say how sincerely I ask pardon for having grieved you. But, indeed, I
am not prejudiced beyond the power of conviction. Tell me what this
Count of Monte Cristo has done for you.”

“I own that your question embarrasses me, Valentine, for I cannot say
that the count has rendered me any ostensible service. Still, as I have
already told you, I have an instinctive affection for him, the source
of which I cannot explain to you. Has the sun done anything for me? No;
he warms me with his rays, and it is by his light that I see
you—nothing more. Has such and such a perfume done anything for me? No;
its odor charms one of my senses—that is all I can say when I am asked
why I praise it. My friendship for him is as strange and unaccountable
as his for me. A secret voice seems to whisper to me that there must be
something more than chance in this unexpected reciprocity of
friendship. In his most simple actions, as well as in his most secret
thoughts, I find a relation to my own. You will perhaps smile at me
when I tell you that, ever since I have known this man, I have
involuntarily entertained the idea that all the good fortune which has
befallen me originated from him. However, I have managed to live thirty
years without this protection, you will say; but I will endeavor a
little to illustrate my meaning. He invited me to dine with him on
Saturday, which was a very natural thing for him to do. Well, what have
I learned since? That your mother and M. de Villefort are both coming
to this dinner. I shall meet them there, and who knows what future
advantages may result from the interview? This may appear to you to be
no unusual combination of circumstances; nevertheless, I perceive some
hidden plot in the arrangement—something, in fact, more than is
apparent on a casual view of the subject. I believe that this singular
man, who appears to fathom the motives of everyone, has purposely
arranged for me to meet M. and Madame de Villefort, and sometimes, I
confess, I have gone so far as to try to read in his eyes whether he
was in possession of the secret of our love.”

“My good friend,” said Valentine, “I should take you for a visionary,
and should tremble for your reason, if I were always to hear you talk
in a strain similar to this. Is it possible that you can see anything
more than the merest chance in this meeting? Pray reflect a little. My
father, who never goes out, has several times been on the point of
refusing this invitation; Madame de Villefort, on the contrary, is
burning with the desire of seeing this extraordinary nabob in his own
house, therefore, she has with great difficulty prevailed on my father
to accompany her. No, no; it is as I have said, Maximilian,—there is no
one in the world of whom I can ask help but yourself and my
grandfather, who is little better than a corpse—no support to cling to
but my mother in heaven!”

“I feel the same as regards yourself.” said Valentine; “and I own that,
if you have no stronger proof to give me——”

“So much the worse,” said Valentine, smiling.

“Yes, since you have known me,” said Morrel, smiling; “but that cannot
apply to the time previous to our acquaintance, Valentine.”

“Ah! what a beautiful creature!” cried Valentine; “why did you not
bring him close to the gate, so that I could talk to him and pat him?”

“Just as they were sitting down to table, M. de Monte Cristo arrived.
He took his seat amongst them; they played, and I won. I am almost
ashamed to say that my gains amounted to 5,000 francs. We separated at
midnight. I could not defer my pleasure, so I took a cabriolet and
drove to the horse dealer’s. Feverish and excited, I rang at the door.
The person who opened it must have taken me for a madman, for I rushed
at once to the stable. Médéah was standing at the rack, eating his hay.
I immediately put on the saddle and bridle, to which operation he lent
himself with the best grace possible; then, putting the 4,500 francs
into the hands of the astonished dealer, I proceeded to fulfil my
intention of passing the night in riding in the Champs-Élysées. As I
rode by the count’s house I perceived a light in one of the windows,
and fancied I saw the shadow of his figure moving behind the curtain.
Now, Valentine, I firmly believe that he knew of my wish to possess
this horse, and that he lost expressly to give me the means of
procuring him.”

“Ah, Valentine,” said Maximilian, “give me but one finger through this
opening in the grating, one finger, the littlest finger of all, that I
may have the happiness of kissing it.”

Valentine mounted on a bench, and passed not only her finger but her
whole hand through the opening. Maximilian uttered a cry of delight,
and, springing forwards, seized the hand extended towards him, and
imprinted on it a fervent and impassioned kiss. The little hand was
then immediately withdrawn, and the young man saw Valentine hurrying
towards the house, as though she were almost terrified at her own
sensations.

We will now relate what was passing in the house of the king’s attorney
after the departure of Madame Danglars and her daughter, and during the
time of the conversation between Maximilian and Valentine, which we
have just detailed.

Noirtier’s hair was long and white, and flowed over his shoulders;
while in his eyes, shaded by thick black lashes, was concentrated, as
it often happens with an organ which is used to the exclusion of the
others, all the activity, address, force, and intelligence which were
formerly diffused over his whole body; and so although the movement of
the arm, the sound of the voice, and the agility of the body, were
wanting, the speaking eye sufficed for all. He commanded with it; it
was the medium through which his thanks were conveyed. In short, his
whole appearance produced on the mind the impression of a corpse with
living eyes, and nothing could be more startling than to observe the
expression of anger or joy suddenly lighting up these organs, while the
rest of the rigid and marble-like features were utterly deprived of the
power of participation. Three persons only could understand this
language of the poor paralytic; these were Villefort, Valentine, and
the old servant of whom we have already spoken. But as Villefort saw
his father but seldom, and then only when absolutely obliged, and as he
never took any pains to please or gratify him when he was there, all
the old man’s happiness was centred in his granddaughter. Valentine, by
means of her love, her patience, and her devotion, had learned to read
in Noirtier’s look all the varied feelings which were passing in his
mind. To this dumb language, which was so unintelligible to others, she
answered by throwing her whole soul into the expression of her
countenance, and in this manner were the conversations sustained
between the blooming girl and the helpless invalid, whose body could
scarcely be called a living one, but who, nevertheless, possessed a
fund of knowledge and penetration, united with a will as powerful as
ever although clogged by a body rendered utterly incapable of obeying
its impulses.

Valentine had solved the problem, and was able easily to understand his
thoughts, and to convey her own in return, and, through her untiring
and devoted assiduity, it was seldom that, in the ordinary transactions
of every-day life, she failed to anticipate the wishes of the living,
thinking mind, or the wants of the almost inanimate body.

Villefort did not need the help of either Valentine or the domestic in
order to carry on with his father the strange conversation which he was
about to begin. As we have said, he perfectly understood the old man’s
vocabulary, and if he did not use it more often, it was only
indifference and _ennui_ which prevented him from so doing. He
therefore allowed Valentine to go into the garden, sent away Barrois,
and after having seated himself at his father’s right hand, while
Madame de Villefort placed herself on the left, he addressed him thus:

“I trust you will not be displeased, sir, that Valentine has not come
with us, or that I dismissed Barrois, for our conference will be one
which could not with propriety be carried on in the presence of either.
Madame de Villefort and I have a communication to make to you.”

“Sir,” resumed Villefort, “we are thinking of marrying Valentine.” Had
the old man’s face been moulded in wax it could not have shown less
emotion at this news than was now to be traced there. “The marriage
will take place in less than three months,” said Villefort.

“We thought this news would possess an interest for you, sir, who have
always entertained a great affection for Valentine; it therefore only
now remains for us to tell you the name of the young man for whom she
is destined. It is one of the most desirable connections which could
possibly be formed; he possesses fortune, a high rank in society, and
every personal qualification likely to render Valentine supremely
happy,—his name, moreover, cannot be wholly unknown to you. It is M.
Franz de Quesnel, Baron d’Épinay.”

“Sir,” said he, “you are aware that Valentine is about to enter her
nineteenth year, which renders it important that she should lose no
time in forming a suitable alliance. Nevertheless, you have not been
forgotten in our plans, and we have fully ascertained beforehand that
Valentine’s future husband will consent, not to live in this house, for
that might not be pleasant for the young people, but that you should
live with them; so that you and Valentine, who are so attached to each
other, would not be separated, and you would be able to pursue exactly
the same course of life which you have hitherto done, and thus, instead
of losing, you will be a gainer by the change, as it will secure to you
two children instead of one, to watch over and comfort you.”

“Now,” continued Villefort, “those to whom the guilt really belongs, by
whom the crime was committed, on whose heads the justice of man may
probably descend here, and the certain judgment of God hereafter, would
rejoice in the opportunity thus afforded of bestowing such a
peace-offering as Valentine on the son of him whose life they so
ruthlessly destroyed.” Noirtier had succeeded in mastering his emotion
more than could have been deemed possible with such an enfeebled and
shattered frame.

It had been agreed that the old man should express his approbation by
closing his eyes, his refusal by winking them several times, and if he
had some desire or feeling to express, he raised them to heaven. If he
wanted Valentine, he closed his right eye only, and if Barrois, the
left. At Madame de Villefort’s proposition he instantly winked his
eyes.

Provoked by a complete refusal, she bit her lip and said, “Then shall I
send Valentine to you?” The old man closed his eyes eagerly, thereby
intimating that such was his wish.

M. and Madame de Villefort bowed and left the room, giving orders that
Valentine should be summoned to her grandfather’s presence, and feeling
sure that she would have much to do to restore calmness to the
perturbed spirit of the invalid. Valentine, with a color still
heightened by emotion, entered the room just after her parents had
quitted it. One look was sufficient to tell her that her grandfather
was suffering, and that there was much on his mind which he was wishing
to communicate to her.

“Are you displeased with me?” cried Valentine in astonishment. M.
Noirtier again closed his eyes.

“And what have I done, dear grandpapa, that you should be angry with
me?” cried Valentine.

“Yes, I understand,” said Valentine; “it is because you love me.” The
old man assented.

“Well, listen,” said Valentine, throwing herself on her knees, and
putting her arm round her grandfather’s neck, “I am vexed, too, for I
do not love M. Franz d’Épinay.”

“When I wished to retire into a convent, you remember how angry you
were with me?” A tear trembled in the eye of the invalid. “Well,”
continued Valentine, “the reason of my proposing it was that I might
escape this hateful marriage, which drives me to despair.” Noirtier’s
breathing came thick and short.

“Do you think you can help me, dear grandpapa?” said Valentine.

“Yes.” Noirtier raised his eyes, it was the sign agreed on between him
and Valentine when he wanted anything.

“What is it you want, dear grandpapa?” said Valentine, and she
endeavored to recall to mind all the things which he would be likely to
need; and as the ideas presented themselves to her mind, she repeated
them aloud, then,—finding that all her efforts elicited nothing but a
constant _“No,”_—she said, “Come, since this plan does not answer, I
will have recourse to another.”

“Ah,” said Valentine, “the thing you desire begins with the letter N;
it is with N that we have to do, then. Well, let me see, what can you
want that begins with N? Na—Ne—Ni—No——”

Valentine fetched a dictionary, which she placed on a desk before
Noirtier; she opened it, and, seeing that the old man’s eye was
thoroughly fixed on its pages, she ran her finger quickly up and down
the columns. During the six years which had passed since Noirtier first
fell into this sad state, Valentine’s powers of invention had been too
often put to the test not to render her expert in devising expedients
for gaining a knowledge of his wishes, and the constant practice had so
perfected her in the art that she guessed the old man’s meaning as
quickly as if he himself had been able to seek for what he wanted. At
the word _Notary_, Noirtier made a sign to her to stop.

“You would wish a notary to be sent for then?” said Valentine.

“Yes.” Valentine rang the bell, and ordered the servant to tell
Monsieur or Madame de Villefort that they were requested to come to M.
Noirtier’s room.

“Are you satisfied now?” inquired Valentine.

“Sir,” said Valentine, “my grandfather wishes for a notary.” At this
strange and unexpected demand M. de Villefort and his father exchanged
looks.

“Yes,” motioned the latter, with a firmness which seemed to declare
that with the help of Valentine and his old servant, who both knew what
his wishes were, he was quite prepared to maintain the contest.

As soon as Barrois had left the room, Noirtier looked at Valentine with
a malicious expression that said many things. The young girl perfectly
understood the look, and so did Villefort, for his countenance became
clouded, and he knitted his eyebrows angrily. He took a seat, and
quietly awaited the arrival of the notary. Noirtier saw him seat
himself with an appearance of perfect indifference, at the same time
giving a side look at Valentine, which made her understand that she
also was to remain in the room. Three-quarters of an hour after,
Barrois returned, bringing the notary with him.

Noirtier cast an appealing look on Valentine, which look was at once so
earnest and imperative, that she answered immediately.

“Permit me,” said the notary, turning first to Villefort and then to
Valentine—“permit me to state that the case in question is just one of
those in which a public officer like myself cannot proceed to act
without thereby incurring a dangerous responsibility. The first thing
necessary to render an act valid is, that the notary should be
thoroughly convinced that he has faithfully interpreted the will and
wishes of the person dictating the act. Now I cannot be sure of the
approbation or disapprobation of a client who cannot speak, and as the
object of his desire or his repugnance cannot be clearly proved to me,
on account of his want of speech, my services here would be quite
useless, and cannot be legally exercised.”

The notary then prepared to retire. An imperceptible smile of triumph
was expressed on the lips of the procureur. Noirtier looked at
Valentine with an expression so full of grief, that she arrested the
departure of the notary.

Noirtier gave Valentine such a look of tenderness and gratitude that it
was comprehended even by the notary himself.

“You must see that to be an utter impossibility,” said Villefort.
Valentine and the old man heard this conversation, and Noirtier fixed
his eye so earnestly on Valentine that she felt bound to answer to the
look.

Valentine named all the letters of the alphabet until she came to W. At
this letter the eloquent eye of Noirtier gave her notice that she was
to stop.

“Wait,” said Valentine; and, turning to her grandfather, she repeated,
“Wa—We—Wi——” The old man stopped her at the last syllable. Valentine
then took the dictionary, and the notary watched her while she turned
over the pages.

“Yes,” said the procureur, “and I think the will promises to be yet
more extraordinary, for I cannot see how it is to be drawn up without
the intervention of Valentine, and she may, perhaps, be considered as
too much interested in its contents to allow of her being a suitable
interpreter of the obscure and ill-defined wishes of her grandfather.”

“What?” said Villefort, “do you mean to say that Valentine is not
interested in your will?”

“Is it, then, to Mademoiselle Valentine de Villefort that you leave
these 900,000 francs?” demanded the notary, thinking he had only to
insert this clause, but waiting first for the assent of Noirtier, which
it was necessary should be given before all the witnesses of this
singular scene.

Valentine, when her name was made the subject of discussion, had
stepped back, to escape unpleasant observation; her eyes were cast
down, and she was crying. The old man looked at her for an instant with
an expression of the deepest tenderness, then, turning towards the
notary, he significantly winked his eye in token of dissent.

“What,” said the notary, “do you not intend making Mademoiselle
Valentine de Villefort your residuary legatee?”

Valentine raised her head, struck dumb with astonishment. It was not so
much the conviction that she was disinherited that caused her grief,
but her total inability to account for the feelings which had provoked
her grandfather to such an act. But Noirtier looked at her with so much
affectionate tenderness that she exclaimed:

“Ah, yes, most assuredly,” said the eyes of the paralytic, for he
closed them with an expression which Valentine could not mistake.

“Thank you, thank you,” murmured she. The old man’s declaration that
Valentine was not the destined inheritor of his fortune had excited the
hopes of Madame de Villefort; she gradually approached the invalid, and
said:

“What have we all done, then, dear grandpapa?” said Valentine; “you no
longer seem to love any of us?”

The old man’s eyes passed rapidly from Villefort and his wife, and
rested on Valentine with a look of unutterable fondness.

Noirtier fixed his intelligent eyes on Valentine’s hand.

“Ah,” cried Valentine suddenly, “I understand. It is my marriage you
mean, is it not, dear grandpapa?”

“Yes, yes, yes,” signed the paralytic, casting on Valentine a look of
joyful gratitude for having guessed his meaning.

“You do not wish me to marry M. Franz d’Épinay?” observed Valentine.

There was a profound silence. The two notaries were holding a
consultation as to the best means of proceeding with the affair.
Valentine was looking at her grandfather with a smile of intense
gratitude, and Villefort was biting his lips with vexation, while
Madame de Villefort could not succeed in repressing an inward feeling
of joy, which, in spite of herself, appeared in her whole countenance.

Valentine sank weeping into a chair.

“Yes,” said Madame de Villefort; “and it is still entirely in the power
of my husband to cause the will, which is now in prejudice of
Valentine, to be altered in her favor.”

“Do you think,” said Madame de Villefort, “that Valentine is in league
with him? She has always been opposed to this marriage, and I should
not be at all surprised if what we have just seen and heard is nothing
but the execution of a plan concerted between them.”

“Although,” said Villefort, “it will be a serious thing for Valentine
to lose her grandfather’s fortune, I do not think that M. d’Épinay will
be frightened at this pecuniary loss. He will, perhaps, hold me in
greater esteem than the money itself, seeing that I sacrifice
everything in order to keep my word with him. Besides, he knows that
Valentine is rich in right of her mother, and that she will, in all
probability, inherit the fortune of M. and Madame de Saint-Méran, her
mother’s parents, who both love her tenderly.”

“And who are fully as well worth loving and tending as M. Noirtier,”
said Madame de Villefort; “besides, they are to come to Paris in about
a month, and Valentine, after the affront she has received, need not
consider it necessary to continue to bury herself alive by being shut
up with M. Noirtier.”

“True,” said Madame de Villefort, with an intonation of voice which it
is impossible to describe; “is it not unjust—shamefully unjust? Poor
Edward is as much M. Noirtier’s grandchild as Valentine, and yet, if
she had not been going to marry M. Franz, M. Noirtier would have left
her all his money; and supposing Valentine to be disinherited by her
grandfather, she will still be three times richer than he.”

At the door the count was met by the two notaries, who had just
completed the act which was to disinherit Valentine, and who were
leaving under the conviction of having done a thing which could not
fail of redounding considerably to their credit.

“It is probable,” stammered out Villefort, trying to smile; “but I can
assure you that I had nothing to do with any such proceeding. This
house is part of Valentine’s marriage-portion, and M. de Saint-Méran
wished to sell it; for if it had remained another year or two
uninhabited it would have fallen to ruin.”

Ever since Valentine’s dowry had been mentioned, Morrel had been silent
and sad.

“Yes; summoned by M. de Villefort, who is apparently as anxious to get
Mademoiselle Valentine married as M. Danglars is to see Mademoiselle
Eugénie settled. It must be a very irksome office to be the father of a
grown-up daughter; it seems to make one feverish, and to raise one’s
pulse to ninety beats a minute until the deed is done.”

“Because Madame de Saint-Méran is just arrived in Paris, bringing the
news of M. de Saint-Méran’s death, which took place on the first stage
after he left Marseilles. Madame de Villefort, who was in very good
spirits, would neither believe nor think of the misfortune, but
Mademoiselle Valentine, at the first words, guessed the whole truth,
notwithstanding all the precautions of her father; the blow struck her
like a thunderbolt, and she fell senseless.”

They re-entered the drawing-room, which Valentine and Madame de
Villefort had just quitted. It is perhaps needless to add that Morrel
departed almost at the same time.

“A week ago,” continued Madame de Saint-Méran, “we went out together in
the carriage after dinner. M. de Saint-Méran had been unwell for some
days; still, the idea of seeing our dear Valentine again inspired him
with courage, and notwithstanding his illness he would leave. At six
leagues from Marseilles, after having eaten some of the lozenges he is
accustomed to take, he fell into such a deep sleep, that it appeared to
me unnatural; still I hesitated to wake him, although I fancied that
his face was flushed, and that the veins of his temples throbbed more
violently than usual. However, as it became dark, and I could no longer
see, I fell asleep; I was soon aroused by a piercing shriek, as from a
person suffering in his dreams, and he suddenly threw his head back
violently. I called the valet, I stopped the postilion, I spoke to M.
de Saint-Méran, I applied my smelling-salts; but all was over, and I
arrived at Aix by the side of a corpse.”

“God has supported me through all; and then, my dear marquis, he would
certainly have done everything for me that I performed for him. It is
true that since I left him, I seem to have lost my senses. I cannot
cry; at my age they say that we have no more tears,—still I think that
when one is in trouble one should have the power of weeping. Where is
Valentine, sir? It is on her account I am here; I wish to see
Valentine.”

Villefort thought it would be terrible to reply that Valentine was at a
ball; so he only said that she had gone out with her step-mother, and
that she should be fetched. “This instant, sir—this instant, I beseech
you!” said the old lady. Villefort placed the arm of Madame de
Saint-Méran within his own, and conducted her to his apartment.

The marchioness raised her head at this word, and beholding the man who
so forcibly reminded her of her deeply-regretted child, who still lived
for her in Valentine, she felt touched at the name of mother, and
bursting into tears, she fell on her knees before an armchair, where
she buried her venerable head. Villefort left her to the care of the
women, while old Barrois ran, half-scared, to his master; for nothing
frightens old people so much as when death relaxes its vigilance over
them for a moment in order to strike some other old person. Then, while
Madame de Saint-Méran remained on her knees, praying fervently,
Villefort sent for a cab, and went himself to fetch his wife and
daughter from Madame de Morcerf’s. He was so pale when he appeared at
the door of the ball-room, that Valentine ran to him, saying:

“Your grandmamma has just arrived, Valentine,” said M. de Villefort.

“And grandpapa?” inquired the young girl, trembling with apprehension.
M. de Villefort only replied by offering his arm to his daughter. It
was just in time, for Valentine’s head swam, and she staggered; Madame
de Villefort instantly hastened to her assistance, and aided her
husband in dragging her to the carriage, saying:

And the wretched family departed, leaving a cloud of sadness hanging
over the rest of the evening. At the foot of the stairs, Valentine
found Barrois awaiting her.

Valentine found her grandmother in bed; silent caresses, heartwrung
sobs, broken sighs, burning tears, were all that passed in this sad
interview, while Madame de Villefort, leaning on her husband’s arm,
maintained all outward forms of respect, at least towards the poor
widow. She soon whispered to her husband:

“Yes, yes,” she said softly to Valentine, “let her leave; but do you
stay.”

Madame de Villefort left, and Valentine remained alone beside the bed,
for the procureur, overcome with astonishment at the unexpected death,
had followed his wife. Meanwhile, Barrois had returned for the first
time to old Noirtier, who having heard the noise in the house, had, as
we have said, sent his old servant to inquire the cause; on his return,
his quick intelligent eye interrogated the messenger.

Barrois, therefore, as we have seen, watched for Valentine, and
informed her of her grandfather’s wish. Consequently, Valentine came up
to Noirtier, on leaving Madame de Saint-Méran, who in the midst of her
grief had at last yielded to fatigue and fallen into a feverish sleep.
Within reach of her hand they placed a small table upon which stood a
bottle of orangeade, her usual beverage, and a glass. Then, as we have
said, the young girl left the bedside to see M. Noirtier.

Valentine kissed the old man, who looked at her with such tenderness
that her eyes again filled with tears, whose sources he thought must be
exhausted. The old gentleman continued to dwell upon her with the same
expression.

“Yes, yes,” said Valentine, “you mean that I have yet a kind
grandfather left, do you not.” The old man intimated that such was his
meaning. “Ah, yes, happily I have,” replied Valentine. “Without that,
what would become of me?”

“Oh, dear grandmamma, are you worse?” exclaimed Valentine, perceiving
all these signs of agitation.

“My father?” inquired Valentine, uneasily.

Valentine durst not oppose her grandmother’s wish, the cause of which
she did not know, and an instant afterwards Villefort entered.

During the whole of this conversation Valentine had remained silent.

“You, madame?” “You, dear mamma?” exclaimed M. de Villefort and
Valentine at the same time.

“A stepmother is never a mother, sir. But this is not to the
purpose,—our business concerns Valentine, let us leave the dead in
peace.”

“My dear grandmother,” interrupted Valentine, “consider decorum—the
recent death. You would not have me marry under such sad auspices?”

“It is well. As soon as he arrives inform me. We must be expeditious.
And then I also wish to see a notary, that I may be assured that all
our property returns to Valentine.”

“Ah, grandmamma,” murmured Valentine, pressing her lips on the burning
brow, “do you wish to kill me? Oh, how feverish you are; we must not
send for a notary, but for a doctor!”

“The same as usual, my dear, my glass is there on the table—give it to
me, Valentine.” Valentine poured the orangeade into a glass and gave it
to her grandmother with a certain degree of dread, for it was the same
glass she fancied that had been touched by the spectre.

M. de Villefort left the room, and Valentine seated herself at the
bedside of her grandmother. The poor child appeared herself to require
the doctor she had recommended to her aged relative. A bright spot
burned in either cheek, her respiration was short and difficult, and
her pulse beat with feverish excitement. She was thinking of the
despair of Maximilian, when he should be informed that Madame de
Saint-Méran, instead of being an ally, was unconsciously acting as his
enemy.

More than once she thought of revealing all to her grandmother, and she
would not have hesitated a moment, if Maximilian Morrel had been named
Albert de Morcerf or Raoul de Château-Renaud; but Morrel was of
plebeian extraction, and Valentine knew how the haughty Marquise de
Saint-Méran despised all who were not noble. Her secret had each time
been repressed when she was about to reveal it, by the sad conviction
that it would be useless to do so; for, were it once discovered by her
father and mother, all would be lost.

The notary, who was at the door, immediately entered. “Go, Valentine,”
said Madame de Saint-Méran, “and leave me with this gentleman.”

The young girl kissed her grandmother, and left with her handkerchief
to her eyes; at the door she found the valet de chambre, who told her
that the doctor was waiting in the dining-room. Valentine instantly ran
down. The doctor was a friend of the family, and at the same time one
of the cleverest men of the day, and very fond of Valentine, whose
birth he had witnessed. He had himself a daughter about her age, but
whose life was one continued source of anxiety and fear to him from her
mother having been consumptive.

“Oh,” said Valentine, “we have been waiting for you with such
impatience, dear M. d’Avrigny. But, first of all, how are Madeleine and
Antoinette?”

Valentine colored. M. d’Avrigny carried the science of divination
almost to a miraculous extent, for he was one of the physicians who
always work upon the body through the mind.

“Alas,” said Valentine, restraining her tears, “my grandfather is
dead.”

“Yes,” said Valentine, “he was very fond of me.”

“Who does not love you?” Valentine smiled sadly. “What are your
grandmother’s symptoms?”

“It is the first time I ever saw her in this condition,” said
Valentine; “and this morning she frightened me so that I thought her
mad; and my father, who you know is a strong-minded man, himself
appeared deeply impressed.”

“We will go and see,” said the doctor; “what you tell me seems very
strange.” The notary here descended, and Valentine was informed that
her grandmother was alone.

The doctor pressed Valentine’s hand, and while he visited her
grandmother, she descended the steps. We need not say which portion of
the garden was her favorite walk. After remaining for a short time in
the parterre surrounding the house, and gathering a rose to place in
her waist or hair, she turned into the dark avenue which led to the
bench; then from the bench she went to the gate. As usual, Valentine
strolled for a short time among her flowers, but without gathering
them. The mourning in her heart forbade her assuming this simple
ornament, though she had not yet had time to put on the outward
semblance of woe.

It was indeed Maximilian Morrel, who had passed a wretched existence
since the previous day. With the instinct peculiar to lovers he had
anticipated after the return of Madame de Saint-Méran and the death of
the marquis, that something would occur at M. de Villefort’s in
connection with his attachment for Valentine. His presentiments were
realized, as we shall see, and his uneasy forebodings had goaded him
pale and trembling to the gate under the chestnut-trees.

Valentine was ignorant of the cause of this sorrow and anxiety, and as
it was not his accustomed hour for visiting her, she had gone to the
spot simply by accident or perhaps through sympathy. Morrel called her,
and she ran to the gate.

“This is, indeed, a house of mourning,” said Valentine; “speak,
Maximilian, although the cup of sorrow seems already full.”

“Dear Valentine,” said Morrel, endeavoring to conceal his own emotion,
“listen, I entreat you; what I am about to say is very serious. When
are you to be married?”

“I will tell you all,” said Valentine; “from you I have nothing to
conceal. This morning the subject was introduced, and my dear
grandmother, on whom I depended as my only support, not only declared
herself favorable to it, but is so anxious for it, that they only await
the arrival of M. d’Épinay, and the following day the contract will be
signed.”

“Alas,” replied he, “it is dreadful thus to hear my condemnation from
your own lips. The sentence is passed, and, in a few hours, will be
executed; it must be so, and I will not endeavor to prevent it. But,
since you say nothing remains but for M. d’Épinay to arrive that the
contract may be signed, and the following day you will be his, tomorrow
you will be engaged to M. d’Épinay, for he came this morning to Paris.”
Valentine uttered a cry.

“I was at the house of Monte Cristo an hour since,” said Morrel; “we
were speaking, he of the sorrow your family had experienced, and I of
your grief, when a carriage rolled into the courtyard. Never, till
then, had I placed any confidence in presentiments, but now I cannot
help believing them, Valentine. At the sound of that carriage I
shuddered; soon I heard steps on the staircase, which terrified me as
much as the footsteps of the commander did Don Juan. The door at last
opened; Albert de Morcerf entered first, and I began to hope my fears
were vain, when, after him, another young man advanced, and the count
exclaimed: ‘Ah, here is the Baron Franz d’Épinay!’ I summoned all my
strength and courage to my support. Perhaps I turned pale and trembled,
but certainly I smiled; and five minutes after I left, without having
heard one word that had passed.”

“Valentine, the time has arrived when you must answer me. And remember
my life depends on your answer. What do you intend doing?” Valentine
held down her head; she was overwhelmed.

“Listen,” said Morrel; “it is not the first time you have contemplated
our present position, which is a serious and urgent one; I do not think
it is a moment to give way to useless sorrow; leave that for those who
like to suffer at their leisure and indulge their grief in secret.
There are such in the world, and God will doubtless reward them in
heaven for their resignation on earth, but those who mean to contend
must not lose one precious moment, but must return immediately the blow
which fortune strikes. Do you intend to struggle against our
ill-fortune? Tell me, Valentine for it is that I came to know.”

Valentine trembled, and looked at him with amazement. The idea of
resisting her father, her grandmother, and all the family, had never
occurred to her.

“What do you say, Maximilian?” asked Valentine. “What do you mean by a
struggle? Oh, it would be a sacrilege. What? I resist my father’s
order, and my dying grandmother’s wish? Impossible!”

“In what a tone you speak!” cried Valentine.

“Mademoiselle,” cried Valentine; “mademoiselle! Oh, selfish man! he
sees me in despair, and pretends he cannot understand me!”

“Do you seriously ask my advice, Valentine?”

“Valentine,” said Morrel pushing aside a loose plank, “give me your
hand in token of forgiveness of my anger; my senses are confused, and
during the last hour the most extravagant thoughts have passed through
my brain. Oh, if you refuse my advice——”

“What do you advise?” said Valentine, raising her eyes to heaven and
sighing.

“Well, Valentine,” resumed Maximilian, “I can only say again that you
are right. Truly, it is I who am mad, and you prove to me that passion
blinds the most well-meaning. I appreciate your calm reasoning. It is
then understood that tomorrow you will be irrevocably promised to M.
Franz d’Épinay, not only by that theatrical formality invented to
heighten the effect of a comedy called the signature of the contract,
but your own will?”

“Again you drive me to despair, Maximilian,” said Valentine, “again you
plunge the dagger into the wound! What would you do, tell me, if your
sister listened to such a proposition?”

Morrel pronounced these words with perfect calmness; Valentine looked
at him a moment with her large, scrutinizing eyes, endeavoring not to
let Morrel discover the grief which struggled in her heart.

“Adieu, Valentine, adieu!” said Morrel, bowing.

“Speak, speak!” said Valentine; “I entreat you.”

“Has your resolution changed, Valentine?”

Valentine shook the gate with a strength of which she could not have
been supposed to be possessed, as Morrel was going away, and passing
both her hands through the opening, she clasped and wrung them. “I must
know what you mean to do!” said she. “Where are you going?”

“On you? Valentine! Oh, Heaven forbid! Woman is sacred; the woman one
loves is holy.”

“Maximilian!” said Valentine, “Maximilian, come back, I entreat you!”

“Listen, my dear, my adored Valentine,” said he in his melodious and
grave tone; “those who, like us, have never had a thought for which we
need blush before the world, such may read each other’s hearts. I never
was romantic, and am no melancholy hero. I imitate neither Manfred nor
Anthony; but without words, protestations, or vows, my life has
entwined itself with yours; you leave me, and you are right in doing
so,—I repeat it, you are right; but in losing you, I lose my life. The
moment you leave me, Valentine, I am alone in the world. My sister is
happily married; her husband is only my brother-in-law, that is, a man
whom the ties of social life alone attach to me; no one then longer
needs my useless life. This is what I shall do; I will wait until the
very moment you are married, for I will not lose the shadow of one of
those unexpected chances which are sometimes reserved for us, since M.
Franz may, after all, die before that time, a thunderbolt may fall even
on the altar as you approach it,—nothing appears impossible to one
condemned to die, and miracles appear quite reasonable when his escape
from death is concerned. I will, then, wait until the last moment, and
when my misery is certain, irremediable, hopeless, I will write a
confidential letter to my brother-in-law, another to the prefect of
police, to acquaint them with my intention, and at the corner of some
wood, on the brink of some abyss, on the bank of some river, I will put
an end to my existence, as certainly as I am the son of the most honest
man who ever lived in France.”

Valentine trembled convulsively; she loosened her hold of the gate, her
arms fell by her side, and two large tears rolled down her cheeks. The
young man stood before her, sorrowful and resolute.

Valentine fell on her knees, and pressed her almost bursting heart.
“Maximilian,” said she, “Maximilian, my friend, my brother on earth, my
true husband in heaven, I entreat you, do as I do, live in suffering;
perhaps we may one day be united.”

“My God,” said Valentine, raising both her hands to heaven with a
sublime expression, “I have done my utmost to remain a submissive
daughter; I have begged, entreated, implored; he has regarded neither
my prayers, my entreaties, nor my tears. It is done,” cried she, wiping
away her tears, and resuming her firmness, “I am resolved not to die of
remorse, but rather of shame. Live, Maximilian, and I will be yours.
Say when shall it be? Speak, command, I will obey.”

Morrel, who had already gone some few steps away, again returned, and
pale with joy extended both hands towards Valentine through the
opening.

“Valentine,” said he, “dear Valentine, you must not speak thus—rather
let me die. Why should I obtain you by violence, if our love is mutual?
Is it from mere humanity you bid me live? I would then rather die.”

“Truly,” murmured Valentine, “who on this earth cares for me, if he
does not? Who has consoled me in my sorrow but he? On whom do my hopes
rest? On whom does my bleeding heart repose? On him, on him, always on
him! Yes, you are right, Maximilian, I will follow you. I will leave
the paternal home, I will give up all. Oh, ungrateful girl that I am,”
cried Valentine, sobbing, “I will give up all, even my dear old
grandfather, whom I had nearly forgotten.”

“No,” said Maximilian, “you shall not leave him. M. Noirtier has
evinced, you say, a kind feeling towards me. Well, before you leave,
tell him all; his consent would be your justification in God’s sight.
As soon as we are married, he shall come and live with us, instead of
one child, he shall have two. You have told me how you talk to him and
how he answers you; I shall very soon learn that language by signs,
Valentine, and I promise you solemnly, that instead of despair, it is
happiness that awaits us.”

“Yes, we will wait,” replied Valentine, who revived at these words;
“there are so many things which may save unhappy beings such as we
are.”

“I rely on you, Valentine,” said Morrel; “all you do will be well done;
only if they disregard your prayers, if your father and Madame de
Saint-Méran insist that M. d’Épinay should be called tomorrow to sign
the contract——”

“You are right, Valentine; but how shall I ascertain?”

“Thank you, my adored Valentine, thank you; that is enough. When once I
know the hour, I will hasten to this spot, you can easily get over this
fence with my assistance, a carriage will await us at the gate, in
which you will accompany me to my sister’s; there living, retired or
mingling in society, as you wish, we shall be enabled to use our power
to resist oppression, and not suffer ourselves to be put to death like
sheep, which only defend themselves by sighs.”

“Yes,” said Valentine, “I will now acknowledge you are right,
Maximilian; and now are you satisfied with your betrothal?” said the
young girl sorrowfully.

“My adored Valentine, words cannot express one half of my
satisfaction.”

Valentine had approached, or rather, had placed her lips so near the
fence, that they nearly touched those of Morrel, which were pressed
against the other side of the cold and inexorable barrier.

“Adieu, then, till we meet again,” said Valentine, tearing herself
away. “I shall hear from you?”

The sound of a kiss was heard, and Valentine fled through the avenue.
Morrel listened to catch the last sound of her dress brushing the
branches, and of her footstep on the gravel, then raised his eyes with
an ineffable smile of thankfulness to heaven for being permitted to be
thus loved, and then also disappeared.

The young man returned home and waited all the evening and all the next
day without getting any message. It was only on the following day, at
about ten o’clock in the morning, as he was starting to call on M.
Deschamps, the notary, that he received from the postman a small
billet, which he knew to be from Valentine, although he had not before
seen her writing. It was to this effect:

It is easy to suppose that Morrel’s agitation would not escape the
count’s penetrating eye. Monte Cristo was more affectionate than
ever,—indeed, his manner was so kind that several times Morrel was on
the point of telling him all. But he recalled the promise he had made
to Valentine, and kept his secret.

The young man read Valentine’s letter twenty times in the course of the
day. It was her first, and on what an occasion! Each time he read it he
renewed his vow to make her happy. How great is the power of a woman
who has made so courageous a resolution! What devotion does she deserve
from him for whom she has sacrificed everything! How ought she really
to be supremely loved! She becomes at once a queen and a wife, and it
is impossible to thank and love her sufficiently.

Morrel longed intensely for the moment when he should hear Valentine
say, “Here I am, Maximilian; come and help me.” He had arranged
everything for her escape; two ladders were hidden in the clover-field;
a cabriolet was ordered for Maximilian alone, without a servant,
without lights; at the turning of the first street they would light the
lamps, as it would be foolish to attract the notice of the police by
too many precautions. Occasionally he shuddered; he thought of the
moment when, from the top of that wall, he should protect the descent
of his dear Valentine, pressing in his arms for the first time her of
whom he had yet only kissed the delicate hand.

At length the hour drew near. Never did a man deeply in love allow the
clocks to go on peacefully. Morrel tormented his so effectually that
they struck eight at half-past six. He then said, “It is time to start;
the signature was indeed fixed to take place at nine o’clock, but
perhaps Valentine will not wait for that.” Consequently, Morrel, having
left the Rue Meslay at half-past eight by his timepiece, entered the
clover-field while the clock of Saint-Philippe-du-Roule was striking
eight. The horse and cabriolet were concealed behind a small ruin,
where Morrel had often waited.

This was already half an hour past the time Valentine had fixed. It was
a terrible moment for the young man. The slightest rustling of the
foliage, the least whistling of the wind, attracted his attention, and
drew the perspiration to his brow; then he tremblingly fixed his
ladder, and, not to lose a moment, placed his foot on the first step.
Amidst all these alternations of hope and fear, the clock struck ten.
“It is impossible,” said Maximilian, “that the signing of a contract
should occupy so long a time without unexpected interruptions. I have
weighed all the chances, calculated the time required for all the
forms; something must have happened.”

And then he walked rapidly to and fro, and pressed his burning forehead
against the fence. Had Valentine fainted? or had she been discovered
and stopped in her flight? These were the only obstacles which appeared
possible to the young man.

Then Morrel saw that he had been right in believing that the house was
not illuminated. Instead of lights at every window, as is customary on
days of ceremony, he saw only a gray mass, which was veiled also by a
cloud, which at that moment obscured the moon’s feeble light. A light
moved rapidly from time to time past three windows of the second floor.
These three windows were in Madame de Saint-Méran’s room. Another
remained motionless behind some red curtains which were in Madame de
Villefort’s bedroom. Morrel guessed all this. So many times, in order
to follow Valentine in thought at every hour in the day, had he made
her describe the whole house, that without having seen it he knew it
all.

This darkness and silence alarmed Morrel still more than Valentine’s
absence had done. Almost mad with grief, and determined to venture
everything in order to see Valentine once more, and be certain of the
misfortune he feared, Morrel gained the edge of the clump of trees, and
was going to pass as quickly as possible through the flower-garden,
when the sound of a voice, still at some distance, but which was borne
upon the wind, reached him. At this sound, as he was already partially
exposed to view, he stepped back and concealed himself completely,
remaining perfectly motionless.

He had formed his resolution. If it was Valentine alone, he would speak
as she passed; if she was accompanied, and he could not speak, still he
should see her, and know that she was safe; if they were strangers, he
would listen to their conversation, and might understand something of
this hitherto incomprehensible mystery.

“It could not indeed, my daughter is her only heiress—Valentine alone.
Oh, if such a thought could present itself, I would stab myself to
punish my heart for having for one instant harbored it.”

“I am manifestly protected in a most wonderful, but most terrible
manner,” said he; “but Valentine, poor girl, how will she bear so much
sorrow?”

It cannot be wondered at that his mind, generally so courageous, but
now disturbed by the two strongest human passions, love and fear, was
weakened even to the indulgence of superstitious thoughts. Although it
was impossible that Valentine should see him, hidden as he was, he
thought he heard the shadow at the window call him; his disturbed mind
told him so. This double error became an irresistible reality, and by
one of the incomprehensible transports of youth, he bounded from his
hiding-place, and with two strides, at the risk of being seen, at the
risk of alarming Valentine, at the risk of being discovered by some
exclamation which might escape the young girl, he crossed the
flower-garden, which by the light of the moon resembled a large white
lake, and having passed the rows of orange-trees which extended in
front of the house, he reached the step, ran quickly up and pushed the
door, which opened without offering any resistance.

Valentine had not seen him. Her eyes, raised towards heaven, were
watching a silvery cloud gliding over the azure, its form that of a
shadow mounting towards heaven. Her poetic and excited mind pictured it
as the soul of her grandmother.

Meanwhile, Morrel had traversed the anteroom and found the staircase,
which, being carpeted, prevented his approach being heard, and he had
regained that degree of confidence that the presence of M. de Villefort
even would not have alarmed him. He was quite prepared for any such
encounter. He would at once approach Valentine’s father and acknowledge
all, begging Villefort to pardon and sanction the love which united two
fond and loving hearts. Morrel was mad.

Happily he did not meet anyone. Now, especially, did he find the
description Valentine had given of the interior of the house useful to
him; he arrived safely at the top of the staircase, and while he was
feeling his way, a sob indicated the direction he was to take. He
turned back, a door partly open enabled him to see his road, and to
hear the voice of one in sorrow. He pushed the door open and entered.
At the other end of the room, under a white sheet which covered it, lay
the corpse, still more alarming to Morrel since the account he had so
unexpectedly overheard. By its side, on her knees, and with her head
buried in the cushion of an easy-chair, was Valentine, trembling and
sobbing, her hands extended above her head, clasped and stiff. She had
turned from the window, which remained open, and was praying in accents
that would have affected the most unfeeling; her words were rapid,
incoherent, unintelligible, for the burning weight of grief almost
stopped her utterance.

The moon shining through the open blinds made the lamp appear to burn
paler, and cast a sepulchral hue over the whole scene. Morrel could not
resist this; he was not exemplary for piety, he was not easily
impressed, but Valentine suffering, weeping, wringing her hands before
him, was more than he could bear in silence. He sighed, and whispered a
name, and the head bathed in tears and pressed on the velvet cushion of
the chair—a head like that of a Magdalen by Correggio—was raised and
turned towards him. Valentine perceived him without betraying the least
surprise. A heart overwhelmed with one great grief is insensible to
minor emotions. Morrel held out his hand to her. Valentine, as her only
apology for not having met him, pointed to the corpse under the sheet,
and began to sob again.

Neither dared for some time to speak in that room. They hesitated to
break the silence which death seemed to impose; at length Valentine
ventured.

“Valentine,” said Morrel with a trembling voice, “I had waited since
half-past eight, and did not see you come; I became uneasy, leaped the
wall, found my way through the garden, when voices conversing about the
fatal event——”

“What voices?” asked Valentine. Morrel shuddered as he thought of the
conversation of the doctor and M. de Villefort, and he thought he could
see through the sheet the extended hands, the stiff neck, and the
purple lips.

“No,” said Valentine, “you might meet someone; stay.”

“How do you know it is the doctor?” asked Valentine, astonished.

Valentine looked at the young man; they heard the street door close,
then M. de Villefort locked the garden door, and returned upstairs. He
stopped a moment in the anteroom, as if hesitating whether to turn to
his own apartment or into Madame de Saint-Méran’s; Morrel concealed
himself behind a door; Valentine remained motionless, grief seeming to
deprive her of all fear. M. de Villefort passed on to his own room.

“Now,” said Valentine, “you can neither go out by the front door nor by
the garden.”

“Can you mean it, Valentine?”

“Be careful, Valentine,” said Morrel, hesitating to comply with the
young girl’s wishes; “I now see my error—I acted like a madman in
coming in here. Are you sure you are more reasonable?”

“Yes,” said Valentine; “and I have but one scruple,—that of leaving my
dear grandmother’s remains, which I had undertaken to watch.”

“Valentine,” said Morrel, “death is in itself sacred.”

“Yes,” said Valentine; “besides, it will not be for long.”

“Barrois,” said Valentine, “shut the door, and let no one come in.”

Noirtier, seated in his chair, and listening to every sound, was
watching the door; he saw Valentine, and his eye brightened. There was
something grave and solemn in the approach of the young girl which
struck the old man, and immediately his bright eye began to
interrogate.

“Well, grandpapa,” said Valentine, kneeling before him, and pointing to
Maximilian, “I love him, and will be only his; were I compelled to
marry another, I would destroy myself.”

“You like M. Maximilian Morrel, do you not, grandpapa?” asked
Valentine.

“That is it,” said the old man’s eye. Then he looked anxiously at
Valentine.

Valentine arose, placed a chair for Morrel, requested Barrois not to
admit anyone, and having tenderly embraced her grandfather, and
sorrowfully taken leave of Morrel, she went away. To prove to Noirtier
that he was in Valentine’s confidence and knew all their secrets,
Morrel took the dictionary, a pen, and some paper, and placed them all
on a table where there was a light.

“But first,” said Morrel, “allow me, sir, to tell you who I am, how
much I love Mademoiselle Valentine, and what are my designs respecting
her.”

It was an imposing sight to witness this old man, apparently a mere
useless burden, becoming the sole protector, support, and adviser of
the lovers who were both young, beautiful, and strong. His remarkably
noble and austere expression struck Morrel, who began his story with
trembling. He related the manner in which he had become acquainted with
Valentine, and how he had loved her, and that Valentine, in her
solitude and her misfortune, had accepted the offer of his devotion. He
told him his birth, his position, his fortune, and more than once, when
he consulted the look of the paralytic, that look answered, “That is
good, proceed.”

“This was our resolution; a cabriolet was in waiting at the gate, in
which I intended to carry off Valentine to my sister’s house, to marry
her, and to wait respectfully M. de Villefort’s pardon.”

“I will find him, as I told you. I will tell him the ties which bind me
to Mademoiselle Valentine; if he be a sensible man, he will prove it by
renouncing of his own accord the hand of his betrothed, and will secure
my friendship, and love until death; if he refuse, either through
interest or ridiculous pride, after I have proved to him that he would
be forcing my wife from me, that Valentine loves me, and will have no
other, I will fight with him, give him every advantage, and I shall
kill him, or he will kill me; if I am victorious, he will not marry
Valentine, and if I die, I am very sure Valentine will not marry him.”

“But delay may ruin our plan, sir,” replied the young man. “Alone,
Valentine has no power; she will be compelled to submit. I am here
almost miraculously, and can scarcely hope for so good an opportunity
to occur again. Believe me, there are only the two plans I have
proposed to you; forgive my vanity, and tell me which you prefer. Do
you authorize Mademoiselle Valentine to intrust herself to my honor?”

Morrel made a sign that he was ready to obey. “But,” said he, “first
allow me to embrace you as your daughter did just now.” Noirtier’s
expression could not be understood. The young man pressed his lips on
the same spot, on the old man’s forehead, where Valentine’s had been.
Then he bowed a second time and retired.

He found outside the door the old servant, to whom Valentine had given
directions. Morrel was conducted along a dark passage, which led to a
little door opening on the garden, soon found the spot where he had
entered, with the assistance of the shrubs gained the top of the wall,
and by his ladder was in an instant in the clover-field where his
cabriolet was still waiting for him. He got in it, and thoroughly
wearied by so many emotions, arrived about midnight in the Rue Meslay,
threw himself on his bed and slept soundly.

“At any rate,” said Albert, “whatever disease or doctor may have killed
her, M. de Villefort, or rather, Mademoiselle Valentine,—or, still
rather, our friend Franz, inherits a magnificent fortune, amounting, I
believe, to 80,000 livres per annum.”

These apparently simple words pierced Morrel to the heart. This man had
seen Valentine, and spoken to her! The young and high-spirited officer
required all his strength of mind to resist breaking his oath. He took
the arm of Château-Renaud, and turned towards the vault, where the
attendants had already placed the two coffins.

“M. d’Épinay,” said he, “allow me to remind you at this moment,—which
is perhaps not so ill-chosen as at first sight may appear, for
obedience to the wishes of the departed is the first offering which
should be made at their tomb,—allow me then to remind you of the wish
expressed by Madame de Saint-Méran on her death-bed, that Valentine’s
wedding might not be deferred. You know the affairs of the deceased are
in perfect order, and her will bequeaths to Valentine the entire
property of the Saint-Méran family; the notary showed me the documents
yesterday, which will enable us to draw up the contract immediately.
You may call on the notary, M. Deschamps, Place Beauveau, Faubourg
Saint-Honoré, and you have my authority to inspect those deeds.”

“Sir,” replied M. d’Épinay, “it is not, perhaps, the moment for
Mademoiselle Valentine, who is in deep distress, to think of a husband;
indeed, I fear——”

“Valentine will have no greater pleasure than that of fulfilling her
grandmother’s last injunctions; there will be no obstacle from that
quarter, I assure you.”

“Then,” replied M. de Villefort, “have the kindness to wait half an
hour; Valentine shall come down into the drawing-room. I will send for
M. Deschamps; we will read and sign the contract before we separate,
and this evening Madame de Villefort shall accompany Valentine to her
estate, where we will rejoin them in a week.”

“I shall expect you, then, in half an hour, baron, and Valentine will
be ready.”

Franz bowed and left the room. Scarcely had the door closed, when M. de
Villefort sent to tell Valentine to be ready in the drawing-room in
half an hour, as he expected the notary and M. d’Épinay and his
witnesses. The news caused a great sensation throughout the house;
Madame de Villefort would not believe it, and Valentine was
thunderstruck. She looked around for help, and would have gone down to
her grandfather’s room, but on the stairs she met M. de Villefort, who
took her arm and led her into the drawing-room. In the anteroom,
Valentine met Barrois, and looked despairingly at the old servant. A
moment later, Madame de Villefort entered the drawing-room with her
little Edward. It was evident that she had shared the grief of the
family, for she was pale and looked fatigued. She sat down, took Edward
on her knees, and from time to time pressed this child, on whom her
affections appeared centred, almost convulsively to her bosom.

Two carriages were soon heard to enter the courtyard. One was the
notary’s; the other, that of Franz and his friends. In a moment the
whole party was assembled. Valentine was so pale one might trace the
blue veins from her temples, round her eyes and down her cheeks. Franz
was deeply affected. Château-Renaud and Albert looked at each other
with amazement; the ceremony which was just concluded had not appeared
more sorrowful than did that which was about to begin. Madame de
Villefort had placed herself in the shadow behind a velvet curtain, and
as she constantly bent over her child, it was difficult to read the
expression of her face. M. de Villefort was, as usual, unmoved.

“Sir,” said Franz, “I regret much that such a question has been raised
in the presence of Mademoiselle Valentine; I have never inquired the
amount of her fortune, which, however limited it may be, exceeds mine.
My family has sought consideration in this alliance with M. de
Villefort; all I seek is happiness.”

Valentine imperceptibly thanked him, while two silent tears rolled down
her cheeks.

“Besides, sir,” said Villefort, addressing himself to his future
son-in-law, “excepting the loss of a portion of your hopes, this
unexpected will need not personally wound you; M. Noirtier’s weakness
of mind sufficiently explains it. It is not because Mademoiselle
Valentine is going to marry you that he is angry, but because she will
marry, a union with any other would have caused him the same sorrow.
Old age is selfish, sir, and Mademoiselle de Villefort has been a
faithful companion to M. Noirtier, which she cannot be when she becomes
the Baroness d’Épinay. My father’s melancholy state prevents our
speaking to him on any subjects, which the weakness of his mind would
incapacitate him from understanding, and I am perfectly convinced that
at the present time, although, he knows that his granddaughter is going
to be married, M. Noirtier has even forgotten the name of his intended
grandson.” M. de Villefort had scarcely said this, when the door
opened, and Barrois appeared.

Villefort started, Madame de Villefort let her son slip from her knees,
Valentine rose, pale and dumb as a statue. Albert and Château-Renaud
exchanged a second look, more full of amazement than the first. The
notary looked at Villefort.

Astonishment was at its height. Something like a smile was perceptible
on Madame de Villefort’s countenance. Valentine instinctively raised
her eyes, as if to thank heaven.

“Pray go, Valentine,” said; M. de Villefort, “and see what this new
fancy of your grandfather’s is.” Valentine rose quickly, and was
hastening joyfully towards the door, when M. de Villefort altered his
intention.

And without listening to Villefort he arose, and followed Valentine,
who was running downstairs with the joy of a shipwrecked mariner who
finds a rock to cling to. M. de Villefort followed them. Château-Renaud
and Morcerf exchanged a third look of still increasing wonder.

“Listen,” whispered Villefort to Valentine, who could not conceal her
joy; “if M. Noirtier wishes to communicate anything which would delay
your marriage, I forbid you to understand him.”

Valentine blushed, but did not answer. Villefort, approached Noirtier.

“Here is M. Franz d’Épinay,” said he; “you requested to see him. We
have all wished for this interview, and I trust it will convince you
how ill-formed are your objections to Valentine’s marriage.”

Noirtier answered only by a look which made Villefort’s blood run cold.
He motioned to Valentine to approach. In a moment, thanks to her habit
of conversing with her grandfather, she understood that he asked for a
key. Then his eye was fixed on the drawer of a small chest between the
windows. She opened the drawer, and found a key; and, understanding
that was what he wanted, again watched his eyes, which turned toward an
old secretaire which had been neglected for many years and was supposed
to contain nothing but useless documents.

“Shall I open the secretaire?” asked Valentine.

Valentine opened it and drew out a bundle of papers. “Is that what you
wish for?” asked she.

“Ah! is there a secret spring?” said Valentine.

Valentine went to the door, and called Barrois. Villefort’s impatience
during this scene made the perspiration roll from his forehead, and
Franz was stupefied. The old servant came.

“Barrois,” said Valentine, “my grandfather has told me to open that
drawer in the secretaire, but there is a secret spring in it, which you
know—will you open it?”

“Do you wish him to read it?” said Valentine.

“You understand, baron, my grandfather wishes you to read this paper,”
said Valentine.

“Sit down,” said the old man. Villefort took a chair, but Valentine
remained standing by her father’s side, and Franz before him, holding
the mysterious paper in his hand. “Read,” said the old man. Franz
untied it, and in the midst of the most profound silence read:

Franz stopped. “February 5th, 1815!” said he; “it is the day my father
was murdered.” Valentine and Villefort were dumb; the eye of the old
man alone seemed to say clearly, “Go on.”

“Ah, my father!” said Franz, interrupting himself. “I understand now
why they murdered him.” Valentine could not help casting one glance
towards the young man, whose filial enthusiasm it was delightful to
behold. Villefort walked to and fro behind them. Noirtier watched the
expression of each one, and preserved his dignified and commanding
attitude. Franz returned to the manuscript, and continued:

Franz again interrupted himself, and wiped the cold drops from his
brow; there was something awful in hearing the son read aloud in
trembling pallor these details of his father’s death, which had
hitherto been a mystery. Valentine clasped her hands as if in prayer.
Noirtier looked at Villefort with an almost sublime expression of
contempt and pride.

When Franz had finished reading this account, so dreadful for a son;
when Valentine, pale with emotion, had wiped away a tear; when
Villefort, trembling, and crouched in a corner, had endeavored to
lessen the storm by supplicating glances at the implacable old man,—

Villefort mechanically felt for the handle of the door; Valentine, who
understood sooner than anyone her grandfather’s answer, and who had
often seen two scars upon his right arm, drew back a few steps.

“Mademoiselle,” said Franz, turning towards Valentine, “unite your
efforts with mine to find out the name of the man who made me an orphan
at two years of age.” Valentine remained dumb and motionless.

“M,” repeated Franz. The young man’s finger, glided over the words, but
at each one Noirtier answered by a negative sign. Valentine hid her
head between her hands. At length, Franz arrived at the word MYSELF.

If Valentine could have seen the trembling step and agitated
countenance of Franz when he quitted the chamber of M. Noirtier, even
she would have been constrained to pity him. Villefort had only just
given utterance to a few incoherent sentences, and then retired to his
study, where he received about two hours afterwards the following
letter:

M. de Villefort’s communications on the subject were very limited and
concise; he told her, in fact, that an explanation had taken place
between M. Noirtier, M. d’Épinay, and himself, and that the marriage of
Valentine and Franz would consequently be broken off. This was an
awkward and unpleasant thing to have to report to those who were
waiting. She therefore contented herself with saying that M. Noirtier
having at the commencement of the discussion been attacked by a sort of
apoplectic fit, the affair would necessarily be deferred for some days
longer. This news, false as it was following so singularly in the train
of the two similar misfortunes which had so recently occurred,
evidently astonished the auditors, and they retired without a word.

During this time Valentine, at once terrified and happy, after having
embraced and thanked the feeble old man for thus breaking with a single
blow the chain which she had been accustomed to consider as
irrefragable, asked leave to retire to her own room, in order to
recover her composure. Noirtier looked the permission which she
solicited. But instead of going to her own room, Valentine, having once
gained her liberty, entered the gallery, and, opening a small door at
the end of it, found herself at once in the garden.

In the midst of all the strange events which had crowded one on the
other, an indefinable sentiment of dread had taken possession of
Valentine’s mind. She expected every moment that she should see Morrel
appear, pale and trembling, to forbid the signing of the contract, like
the Laird of Ravenswood in _The Bride of Lammermoor_.

It was high time for her to make her appearance at the gate, for
Maximilian had long awaited her coming. He had half guessed what was
going on when he saw Franz quit the cemetery with M. de Villefort. He
followed M. d’Épinay, saw him enter, afterwards go out, and then
re-enter with Albert and Château-Renaud. He had no longer any doubts as
to the nature of the conference; he therefore quickly went to the gate
in the clover-patch, prepared to hear the result of the proceedings,
and very certain that Valentine would hasten to him the first moment
she should be set at liberty. He was not mistaken; peering through the
crevices of the wooden partition, he soon discovered the young girl,
who cast aside all her usual precautions and walked at once to the
barrier. The first glance which Maximilian directed towards her
entirely reassured him, and the first words she spoke made his heart
bound with delight.

“We are saved!” said Valentine.

“But tell me, Valentine, how has it all been effected? What strange
means has he used to compass this blessed end?”

Valentine was on the point of relating all that had passed, but she
suddenly remembered that in doing so she must reveal a terrible secret
which concerned others as well as her grandfather, and she said:

The conversation had now turned upon a topic so pleasing to Morrel,
that he was ready to accede to anything that Valentine thought fit to
propose, and he likewise felt that a piece of intelligence such as he
just heard ought to be more than sufficient to content him for one day.
However, he would not leave without the promise of seeing Valentine
again the next night. Valentine promised all that Morrel required of
her, and certainly it was less difficult now for her to believe that
she should marry Maximilian than it was an hour ago to assure herself
that she should not marry Franz.

“Sir,” said she, “it is superfluous for me to tell you that Valentine’s
marriage is broken off, since it was here that the affair was
concluded.”

“Now that this marriage, which I know you so much disliked, is done
away with, I come to you on an errand which neither M. de Villefort nor
Valentine could consistently undertake.”

The next day M. Noirtier sent for the notary; the first will was torn
up and a second made, in which he left the whole of his fortune to
Valentine, on condition that she should never be separated from him. It
was then generally reported that Mademoiselle de Villefort, the heiress
of the marquis and marchioness of Saint-Méran, had regained the good
graces of her grandfather, and that she would ultimately be in
possession of an income of 300,000 livres.

The old servant introduced Morrel by a private entrance, closed the
door of the study, and soon the rustling of a dress announced the
arrival of Valentine. She looked marvellously beautiful in her deep
mourning dress, and Morrel experienced such intense delight in gazing
upon her that he felt as if he could almost have dispensed with the
conversation of her grandfather.

But the easy-chair of the old man was heard rolling along the floor,
and he soon made his appearance in the room. Noirtier acknowledged by a
look of extreme kindness and benevolence the thanks which Morrel
lavished on him for his timely intervention on behalf of Valentine and
himself—an intervention which had saved them from despair. Morrel then
cast on the invalid an interrogative look as to the new favor which he
designed to bestow on him. Valentine was sitting at a little distance
from them, timidly awaiting the moment when she should be obliged to
speak. Noirtier fixed his eyes on her.

“Am I to say what you told me?” asked Valentine. Noirtier made a sign
that she was to do so.

“Monsieur Morrel,” said Valentine to the young man, who was regarding
her with the most intense interest, “my grandfather, M. Noirtier, had a
thousand things to say, which he told me three days ago; and now, he
has sent for you, that I may repeat them to you. I will repeat them,
then; and since he has chosen me as his interpreter, I will be faithful
to the trust, and will not alter a word of his intentions.”

Valentine cast down her eyes; this was a good omen for Morrel, for he
knew that nothing but happiness could have the power of thus overcoming
Valentine.

“I?” interrupted Valentine; “I shall not leave my grandfather,—that is
an understood thing between us. My apartment will be close to his. Now,
M. de Villefort must either give his consent to this plan or his
refusal; in the first case, I shall leave directly, and in the second,
I shall wait till I am of age, which will be in about ten months. Then
I shall be free, I shall have an independent fortune, and”—

Valentine pronounced these last few words in such a low tone, that
nothing but Morrel’s intense interest in what she was saying could have
enabled him to hear them.

“Have I not explained your wishes, grandpapa?” said Valentine,
addressing Noirtier.

“Oh,” cried Morrel, almost tempted to throw himself on his knees before
Noirtier and Valentine, and to adore them as two superior beings, “what
have I ever done in my life to merit such unbounded happiness?”

“Therefore,” continued Valentine, looking playfully at Maximilian, “no
more inconsiderate actions—no more rash projects; for you surely would
not wish to compromise one who from this day regards herself as
destined, honorably and happily, to bear your name?”

“How hot you look, my good Barrois,” said Valentine.

Barrois took away the waiter, and hardly was he outside the door, which
in his haste he forgot to shut, than they saw him throw back his head
and empty to the very dregs the glass which Valentine had filled.
Valentine and Morrel were exchanging their adieux in the presence of
Noirtier when a ring was heard at the door-bell. It was the signal of a
visit. Valentine looked at her watch.

“Barrois will open the door for you,” said Valentine, addressing
Morrel. “And now remember one thing, Monsieur Officer, that my
grandfather commands you not to take any rash or ill-advised step which
would be likely to compromise our happiness.”

At this moment Barrois entered. “Who rang?” asked Valentine.

“What is the matter, Barrois?” said Valentine. The old man did not
answer, but looked at his master with wild staring eyes, while with his
cramped hand he grasped a piece of furniture to enable him to stand
upright.

By this time his haggard eyes had the appearance of being ready to
start from their sockets; his head fell back, and the lower extremities
of the body began to stiffen. Valentine uttered a cry of horror; Morrel
took her in his arms, as if to defend her from some unknown danger.

At this moment M. de Villefort, attracted by the noise, appeared on the
threshold. Morrel relaxed his hold of Valentine, and retreating to a
distant corner of the room remained half hidden behind a curtain. Pale
as if he had been gazing on a serpent, he fixed his terrified eye on
the agonized sufferer.

“Madame, madame!” cried Valentine, calling her step-mother, and running
upstairs to meet her; “come quick, quick!—and bring your bottle of
smelling-salts with you.”

“Madame,” replied Valentine, “he has not even breakfasted. He has been
running very fast on an errand with which my grandfather charged him,
and when he returned, took nothing but a glass of lemonade.”

“Take this,” said Madame de Villefort, giving her smelling-bottle to
Valentine. “They will, no doubt, bleed him; therefore I will retire,
for I cannot endure the sight of blood;” and she followed her husband
upstairs. Morrel now emerged from his hiding-place, where he had
remained quite unperceived, so great had been the general confusion.

“Go away as quick as you can, Maximilian,” said Valentine, “and stay
till I send for you. Go.”

Morrel looked towards Noirtier for permission to retire. The old man,
who had preserved all his usual coolness, made a sign to him to do so.
The young man pressed Valentine’s hand to his lips, and then left the
house by a back staircase.

“Must I go too?” asked Valentine timidly.

Valentine looked at M. d’Avrigny with astonishment, kissed her
grandfather on the forehead, and left the room. The doctor closed the
door after her with a gloomy air.

“Mademoiselle Valentine.” D’Avrigny struck his forehead with his hand.

“You want Valentine, do you not? I will tell them to send her to you.”

“Have pity on Valentine! Listen, it is impossible. I would as willingly
accuse myself! Valentine, whose heart is pure as a diamond or a lily!”

“Listen,” said he; “I have not the strength of mind you have, or rather
that which you would not have, if instead of my daughter Valentine your
daughter Madeleine were concerned.” The doctor turned pale. “Doctor,
every son of woman is born to suffer and to die; I am content to suffer
and to await death.”

They all left, in spite of prayers and entreaties, testifying their
regret at leaving so good a master and mistress, and especially
Mademoiselle Valentine, so good, so kind, and so gentle.

Villefort looked at Valentine as they said this. She was in tears, and,
strange as it was, in spite of the emotions he felt at the sight of
these tears, he looked also at Madame de Villefort, and it appeared to
him as if a slight gloomy smile had passed over her thin lips, like a
meteor seen passing inauspiciously between two clouds in a stormy sky.

We may easily conceive where Morrel’s appointment was. On leaving Monte
Cristo he walked slowly towards Villefort’s; we say slowly, for Morrel
had more than half an hour to spare to go five hundred steps, but he
had hastened to take leave of Monte Cristo because he wished to be
alone with his thoughts. He knew his time well—the hour when Valentine
was giving Noirtier his breakfast, and was sure not to be disturbed in
the performance of this pious duty. Noirtier and Valentine had given
him leave to go twice a week, and he was now availing himself of that
permission.

He arrived; Valentine was expecting him. Uneasy and almost crazed, she
seized his hand and led him to her grandfather. This uneasiness,
amounting almost to frenzy, arose from the report Morcerf’s adventure
had made in the world, for the affair at the Opera was generally known.
No one at Villefort’s doubted that a duel would ensue from it.
Valentine, with her woman’s instinct, guessed that Morrel would be
Monte Cristo’s second, and from the young man’s well-known courage and
his great affection for the count, she feared that he would not content
himself with the passive part assigned to him. We may easily understand
how eagerly the particulars were asked for, given, and received; and
Morrel could read an indescribable joy in the eyes of his beloved, when
she knew that the termination of this affair was as happy as it was
unexpected.

“Now,” said Valentine, motioning to Morrel to sit down near her
grandfather, while she took her seat on his footstool,—“now let us talk
about our own affairs. You know, Maximilian, grandpapa once thought of
leaving this house, and taking an apartment away from M. de
Villefort’s.”

“Well,” said Valentine, “you may approve again, for grandpapa is again
thinking of it.”

“And do you know,” said Valentine, “what reason grandpapa gives for
leaving this house.” Noirtier looked at Valentine to impose silence,
but she did not notice him; her looks, her eyes, her smile, were all
for Morrel.

“An excellent one,” said Valentine. “He pretends the air of the
Faubourg Saint-Honoré is not good for me.”

“Not very,” said Valentine. “And grandpapa has become my physician, and
I have the greatest confidence in him, because he knows everything.”

“Oh, it must not be called suffering; I feel a general uneasiness, that
is all. I have lost my appetite, and my stomach feels as if it were
struggling to get accustomed to something.” Noirtier did not lose a
word of what Valentine said.

“A very simple one,” said Valentine. “I swallow every morning a
spoonful of the mixture prepared for my grandfather. When I say one
spoonful, I began by one—now I take four. Grandpapa says it is a
panacea.” Valentine smiled, but it was evident that she suffered.

From Valentine the young man looked towards Noirtier. The latter
watched with strange and deep interest the young girl, absorbed by her
affection, and he also, like Morrel, followed those traces of inward
suffering which was so little perceptible to a common observer that
they escaped the notice of everyone but the grandfather and the lover.

“I know it is very bitter,” said Valentine; “so bitter, that all I
drink afterwards appears to have the same taste.” Noirtier looked
inquiringly at his granddaughter. “Yes, grandpapa,” said Valentine; “it
is so. Just now, before I came down to you, I drank a glass of sugared
water; I left half, because it seemed so bitter.” Noirtier turned pale,
and made a sign that he wished to speak.

Valentine rose to fetch the dictionary. Noirtier watched her with
evident anguish. In fact, the blood was rushing to the young girl’s
head already, her cheeks were becoming red.

“The sun is not shining,” said Morrel, more alarmed by Noirtier’s
expression than by Valentine’s indisposition. He ran towards her. The
young girl smiled.

Morrel watched her as she left the room; he heard her ascend the little
staircase which led both to Madame de Villefort’s apartments and to
hers. As soon as she was gone, Noirtier made a sign to Morrel to take
the dictionary. Morrel obeyed; guided by Valentine, he had learned how
to understand the old man quickly. Accustomed, however, as he was to
the work, he had to repeat most of the letters of the alphabet and to
find every word in the dictionary, so that it was ten minutes before
the thought of the old man was translated by these words,

“Fetch the glass of water and the decanter from Valentine’s room.”

“Why are the glass and decanter empty?” asked he; “Valentine said she
only drank half the glassful.”

“I do not know,” said the servant, “but the housemaid is in
Mademoiselle Valentine’s room: perhaps she has emptied them.”

“Ask her,” said Morrel, translating Noirtier’s thought this time by his
look. The servant went out, but returned almost immediately.
“Mademoiselle Valentine passed through the room to go to Madame de
Villefort’s,” said he; “and in passing, as she was thirsty, she drank
what remained in the glass; as for the decanter, Master Edward had
emptied that to make a pond for his ducks.”

It was indeed Madame Danglars and her daughter whom Valentine had seen;
they had been ushered into Madame de Villefort’s room, who had said she
would receive them there. That is why Valentine passed through her
room, which was on a level with Valentine’s, and only separated from it
by Edward’s. The two ladies entered the drawing-room with that sort of
official stiffness which preludes a formal communication. Among worldly
people manner is contagious. Madame de Villefort received them with
equal solemnity. Valentine entered at this moment, and the formalities
were resumed.

Eugénie pronounced these words with so firm a tone that the color
mounted to Valentine’s cheeks. The timid girl could not understand that
vigorous nature which appeared to have none of the timidities of woman.

“But,” said Valentine, timidly, “does all the father’s shame revert
upon the son? Monsieur Albert appears to me quite innocent of the
treason charged against the general.”

Valentine also knew the truth, but she did not answer. A single word
had reminded her that Morrel was expecting her in M. Noirtier’s room.
Deeply engaged with a sort of inward contemplation, Valentine had
ceased for a moment to join in the conversation. She would, indeed,
have found it impossible to repeat what had been said the last few
minutes, when suddenly Madame Danglars’ hand, pressed on her arm,
aroused her from her lethargy.

“It is, my dear Valentine,” said the baroness, “that you are,
doubtless, suffering.”

“Retire, Valentine,” said she; “you are really suffering, and these
ladies will excuse you; drink a glass of pure water, it will restore
you.”

Valentine kissed Eugénie, bowed to Madame Danglars, who had already
risen to take her leave, and went out.

“That poor child,” said Madame de Villefort when Valentine was gone,
“she makes me very uneasy, and I should not be astonished if she had
some serious illness.”

Meanwhile, Valentine, in a sort of excitement which she could not quite
understand, had crossed Edward’s room without noticing some trick of
the child, and through her own had reached the little staircase.

She was within three steps of the bottom; she already heard Morrel’s
voice, when suddenly a cloud passed over her eyes, her stiffened foot
missed the step, her hands had no power to hold the baluster, and
falling against the wall she lost her balance wholly and toppled to the
floor. Morrel bounded to the door, opened it, and found Valentine
stretched out at the bottom of the stairs. Quick as a flash, he raised
her in his arms and placed her in a chair. Valentine opened her eyes.

“You have hurt yourself, perhaps,” said Morrel. “What can I do for you,
Valentine?”

Valentine looked around her; she saw the deepest terror depicted in
Noirtier’s eyes.

“Another attack of giddiness,” said Morrel, clasping his hands. “Oh,
attend to it, Valentine, I entreat you.”

“But no,” said Valentine,—“no, I tell you it is all past, and it was
nothing. Now, let me tell you some news; Eugénie is to be married in a
week, and in three days there is to be a grand feast, a betrothal
festival. We are all invited, my father, Madame de Villefort, and I—at
least, I understood it so.”

“When will it be our turn to think of these things? Oh, Valentine, you
who have so much influence over your grandpapa, try to make him
answer—Soon.”

“And do you,” said Valentine, “depend on me to stimulate the tardiness
and arouse the memory of grandpapa?”

“Yes,” cried Morrel, “make haste. So long as you are not mine,
Valentine, I shall always think I may lose you.”

“Oh,” replied Valentine with a convulsive movement, “oh, indeed,
Maximilian, you are too timid for an officer, for a soldier who, they
say, never knows fear. Ha, ha, ha!”

She burst into a forced and melancholy laugh, her arms stiffened and
twisted, her head fell back on her chair, and she remained motionless.
The cry of terror which was stopped on Noirtier’s lips, seemed to start
from his eyes. Morrel understood it; he knew he must call assistance.
The young man rang the bell violently; the housemaid who had been in
Mademoiselle Valentine’s room, and the servant who had replaced
Barrois, ran in at the same moment. Valentine was so pale, so cold, so
inanimate that without listening to what was said to them they were
seized with the fear which pervaded that house, and they flew into the
passage crying for help. Madame Danglars and Eugénie were going out at
that moment; they heard the cause of the disturbance.

Villefort sprang into the room, ran to Valentine, and took her in his
arms.

A mournful sob burst from Villefort’s heart; he approached the doctor,
and seizing his arm,—“Valentine,” said he, “it is Valentine’s turn!”

“Well,” said the Count, astonished at his perseverance, which he could
not understand, and looking still more earnestly at Maximilian, “let it
begin again,—it is like the house of the Atreidae;19 God has condemned
them, and they must submit to their punishment. They will all
disappear, like the fabrics children build with cards, and which fall,
one by one, under the breath of their builder, even if there are two
hundred of them. Three months since it was M. de Saint-Méran; Madame de
Saint-Méran two months since; the other day it was Barrois; today, the
old Noirtier, or young Valentine.”

“I love most fondly—I love madly—I love as a man who would give his
life-blood to spare her a tear—I love Valentine de Villefort, who is
being murdered at this moment! Do you understand me? I love her; and I
ask God and you how I can save her?”

Monte Cristo uttered a cry which those only can conceive who have heard
the roar of a wounded lion. “Unhappy man,” cried he, wringing his hands
in his turn; “you love Valentine,—that daughter of an accursed race!”

“I tell you to hope. Do you understand me?” cried Monte Cristo.
“Remember that I never uttered a falsehood and am never deceived. It is
twelve o’clock, Maximilian; thank heaven that you came at noon rather
than in the evening, or tomorrow morning. Listen, Morrel—it is noon; if
Valentine is not now dead, she will not die.”

Meanwhile, Villefort and d’Avrigny had made all possible haste,
Valentine had not revived from her fainting fit on their arrival, and
the doctor examined the invalid with all the care the circumstances
demanded, and with an interest which the knowledge of the secret
intensified twofold. Villefort, closely watching his countenance and
his lips, awaited the result of the examination. Noirtier, paler than
even the young girl, more eager than Villefort for the decision, was
watching also intently and affectionately.

“Sir,” said d’Avrigny to Villefort, “call Mademoiselle Valentine’s
maid, if you please.”

The young woman with tears in her eyes and every mark of affection of a
true mother, approached Valentine and took her hand. D’Avrigny
continued to look at Noirtier; he saw the eyes of the old man dilate
and become round, his cheeks turn pale and tremble; the perspiration
stood in drops upon his forehead.

They carried Valentine away; she had revived, but could scarcely move
or speak, so shaken was her frame by the attack. She had, however, just
power to give one parting look to her grandfather, who in losing her
seemed to be resigning his very soul. D’Avrigny followed the invalid,
wrote a prescription, ordered Villefort to take a cabriolet, go in
person to a chemist’s to get the prescribed medicine, bring it himself,
and wait for him in his daughter’s room. Then, having renewed his
injunction not to give Valentine anything, he went down again to
Noirtier, shut the doors carefully, and after convincing himself that
no one was listening:

“Do you think the same hand which unintentionally struck Barrois has
now attacked Valentine?”

“Then you hope the poison will take no effect on Valentine?”

“It is no news to you,” added d’Avrigny, “to tell you that an attempt
has been made to poison her?” The old man made a sign that he
entertained no doubt upon the subject. “Then how do you hope Valentine
will escape?”

“And by accustoming her to that poison, you have endeavored to
neutralize the effect of a similar poison?” Noirtier’s joy continued.
“And you have succeeded,” exclaimed d’Avrigny. “Without that precaution
Valentine would have died before assistance could have been procured.
The dose has been excessive, but she has only been shaken by it; and
this time, at any rate, Valentine will not die.”

“Well,” said he, “let us go to Valentine; I will give instructions to
everyone, and you, M. de Villefort, will yourself see that no one
deviates from them.”

At the moment when d’Avrigny was returning to Valentine’s room,
accompanied by Villefort, an Italian priest, of serious demeanor and
calm and firm tone, hired for his use the house adjoining the hotel of
M. de Villefort. No one knew how the three former tenants of that house
left it. About two hours afterwards its foundation was reported to be
unsafe; but the report did not prevent the new occupant establishing
himself there with his modest furniture the same day at five o’clock.
The lease was drawn up for three, six, or nine years by the new tenant,
who, according to the rule of the proprietor, paid six months in
advance.

A circle was immediately formed around the door. The count perceived at
one glance Madame Danglars at one end of the drawing-room, M. Danglars
at the other, and Eugénie in front of him. He first advanced towards
the baroness, who was chatting with Madame de Villefort, who had come
alone, Valentine being still an invalid; and without turning aside, so
clear was the road left for him, he passed from the baroness to
Eugénie, whom he complimented in such rapid and measured terms, that
the proud artist was quite struck. Near her was Mademoiselle Louise
d’Armilly, who thanked the count for the letters of introduction he had
so kindly given her for Italy, which she intended immediately to make
use of. On leaving these ladies he found himself with Danglars, who had
advanced to meet him.

“Yes, I know what you mean,” he said; “you refer to the terrible rumors
spread abroad in the world, that the deaths which have kept me in
mourning for the last three months, and from which Valentine has only
escaped by a miracle, have not happened by natural means.”

As the procureur had told Madame Danglars, Valentine was not yet
recovered. Bowed down with fatigue, she was indeed confined to her bed;
and it was in her own room, and from the lips of Madame de Villefort,
that she heard all the strange events we have related; we mean the
flight of Eugénie and the arrest of Andrea Cavalcanti, or rather
Benedetto, together with the accusation of murder pronounced against
him. But Valentine was so weak that this recital scarcely produced the
same effect it would have done had she been in her usual state of
health. Indeed, her brain was only the seat of vague ideas, and
confused forms, mingled with strange fancies, alone presented
themselves before her eyes.

During the daytime Valentine’s perceptions remained tolerably clear,
owing to the constant presence of M. Noirtier, who caused himself to be
carried to his granddaughter’s room, and watched her with his paternal
tenderness; Villefort also, on his return from the law courts,
frequently passed an hour or two with his father and child.

At six o’clock Villefort retired to his study, at eight M. d’Avrigny
himself arrived, bringing the night draught prepared for the young
girl, and then M. Noirtier was carried away. A nurse of the doctor’s
choice succeeded them, and never left till about ten or eleven o’clock,
when Valentine was asleep. As she went downstairs she gave the keys of
Valentine’s room to M. de Villefort, so that no one could reach the
sick-room excepting through that of Madame de Villefort and little
Edward.

Every morning Morrel called on Noirtier to receive news of Valentine,
and, extraordinary as it seemed, each day found him less uneasy.
Certainly, though Valentine still labored under dreadful nervous
excitement, she was better; and moreover, Monte Cristo had told him
when, half distracted, he had rushed to the count’s house, that if she
were not dead in two hours she would be saved. Now four days had
elapsed, and Valentine still lived.

The nervous excitement of which we speak pursued Valentine even in her
sleep, or rather in that state of somnolence which succeeded her waking
hours; it was then, in the silence of night, in the dim light shed from
the alabaster lamp on the chimney-piece, that she saw the shadows pass
and repass which hover over the bed of sickness, and fan the fever with
their trembling wings. First she fancied she saw her stepmother
threatening her, then Morrel stretched his arms towards her; sometimes
mere strangers, like the Count of Monte Cristo came to visit her; even
the very furniture, in these moments of delirium, seemed to move, and
this state lasted till about three o’clock in the morning, when a deep,
heavy slumber overcame the young girl, from which she did not awake
till daylight.

On the evening of the day on which Valentine had learned of the flight
of Eugénie and the arrest of Benedetto,—Villefort having retired as
well as Noirtier and d’Avrigny,—her thoughts wandered in a confused
maze, alternately reviewing her own situation and the events she had
just heard.

Ten minutes had elapsed since the nurse had left; Valentine, who for
the last hour had been suffering from the fever which returned nightly,
incapable of controlling her ideas, was forced to yield to the
excitement which exhausted itself in producing and reproducing a
succession and recurrence of the same fancies and images. The
night-lamp threw out countless rays, each resolving itself into some
strange form to her disordered imagination, when suddenly by its
flickering light Valentine thought she saw the door of her library,
which was in the recess by the chimney-piece, open slowly, though she
in vain listened for the sound of the hinges on which it turned.

At any other time Valentine would have seized the silken bell-pull and
summoned assistance, but nothing astonished her in her present
situation. Her reason told her that all the visions she beheld were but
the children of her imagination, and the conviction was strengthened by
the fact that in the morning no traces remained of the nocturnal
phantoms, who disappeared with the coming of daylight.

“It is not he,” she murmured, and waited, in the assurance that this
was but a dream, for the man to disappear or assume some other form.
Still, she felt her pulse, and finding it throb violently she
remembered that the best method of dispelling such illusions was to
drink, for a draught of the beverage prepared by the doctor to allay
her fever seemed to cause a reaction of the brain, and for a short time
she suffered less. Valentine therefore reached her hand towards the
glass, but as soon as her trembling arm left the bed the apparition
advanced more quickly towards her, and approached the young girl so
closely that she fancied she heard his breath, and felt the pressure of
his hand.

This time the illusion, or rather the reality, surpassed anything
Valentine had before experienced; she began to believe herself really
alive and awake, and the belief that her reason was this time not
deceived made her shudder. The pressure she felt was evidently intended
to arrest her arm, and she slowly withdrew it. Then the figure, from
whom she could not detach her eyes, and who appeared more protecting
than menacing, took the glass, and walking towards the night-light held
it up, as if to test its transparency. This did not seem sufficient;
the man, or rather the ghost—for he trod so softly that no sound was
heard—then poured out about a spoonful into the glass, and drank it.

Valentine witnessed this scene with a sentiment of stupefaction. Every
minute she had expected that it would vanish and give place to another
vision; but the man, instead of dissolving like a shadow, again
approached her, and said in an agitated voice, “Now you may drink.”

Valentine shuddered. It was the first time one of these visions had
ever addressed her in a living voice, and she was about to utter an
exclamation. The man placed his finger on her lips.

“Do not call anyone—do not be alarmed,” said the count; “do not let a
shade of suspicion or uneasiness remain in your breast; the man
standing before you, Valentine (for this time it is no ghost), is
nothing more than the tenderest father and the most respectful friend
you could dream of.”

Valentine could not reply; the voice which indicated the real presence
of a being in the room, alarmed her so much that she feared to utter a
syllable; still the expression of her eyes seemed to inquire, “If your
intentions are pure, why are you here?” The count’s marvellous sagacity
understood all that was passing in the young girl’s mind.

The blood mounted rapidly to the cheeks of Valentine, for the name just
announced by the count dispelled all the fear with which his presence
had inspired her.

“But you say you have watched?” said Valentine uneasily; “where have
you been?—I have not seen you.”

Valentine turned her eyes away, and, with an indignant expression of
pride and modest fear, exclaimed:

“Valentine,” he answered, “during my long watch over you, all I have
observed has been what people visited you, what nourishment was
prepared, and what beverage was served; then, when the latter appeared
dangerous to me, I entered, as I have now done, and substituted, in the
place of the poison, a healthful draught; which, instead of producing
the death intended, caused life to circulate in your veins.”

“Poison—death!” exclaimed Valentine, half believing herself under the
influence of some feverish hallucination; “what are you saying, sir?”

Valentine stretched out her hand, but scarcely had she touched the
glass when she drew back in fear. Monte Cristo took the glass, drank
half its contents, and then presented it to Valentine, who smiled and
swallowed the rest.

“This is how you have lived during the last four nights, Valentine,”
said the count. “But, oh, how I passed that time! Oh, the wretched
hours I have endured—the torture to which I have submitted when I saw
the deadly poison poured into your glass, and how I trembled lest you
should drink it before I could find time to throw it away!”

“Sir,” said Valentine, at the height of her terror, “you say you
endured tortures when you saw the deadly poison poured into my glass;
but if you saw this, you must also have seen the person who poured it?”

Valentine raised herself in bed, and drew over her chest, which
appeared whiter than snow, the embroidered cambric, still moist with
the cold dews of delirium, to which were now added those of terror.
“You saw the person?” repeated the young girl.

“Oh, Heaven,” said Valentine; “is this the reason why grandpapa has
made me share all his beverages during the last month?”

“No,” said Valentine; “who could desire my death?”

“How do you mean?” said Valentine, looking anxiously around.

“Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Valentine, wiping off the drops which ran down
her forehead. Midnight struck slowly and sadly; every hour seemed to
strike with leaden weight upon the heart of the poor girl.

“Valentine,” said the count, “summon up all your courage; still the
beatings of your heart; do not let a sound escape you, and feign to be
asleep; then you will see.”

Valentine seized the count’s hand. “I think I hear a noise,” she said;
“leave me.”

Valentine was alone; two other clocks, slower than that of
Saint-Philippe-du-Roule, struck the hour of midnight from different
directions, and excepting the rumbling of a few carriages all was
silent. Then Valentine’s attention was engrossed by the clock in her
room, which marked the seconds. She began counting them, remarking that
they were much slower than the beatings of her heart; and still she
doubted,—the inoffensive Valentine could not imagine that anyone should
desire her death. Why should they? To what end? What had she done to
excite the malice of an enemy?

When this terrible chain of ideas presented itself, Valentine was
nearly persuaded to ring the bell, and call for help. But through the
door she fancied she saw the luminous eye of the count—that eye which
lived in her memory, and the recollection overwhelmed her with so much
shame that she asked herself whether any amount of gratitude could ever
repay his adventurous and devoted friendship.

Just then the sound of finger-nails slightly grating against the door
of the library informed Valentine that the count was still watching,
and recommended her to do the same; at the same time, on the opposite
side, that is towards Edward’s room, Valentine fancied that she heard
the creaking of the floor; she listened attentively, holding her breath
till she was nearly suffocated; the lock turned, and the door slowly
opened. Valentine had raised herself upon her elbow, and had scarcely
time to throw herself down on the bed and shade her eyes with her arm;
then, trembling, agitated, and her heart beating with indescribable
terror, she awaited the event.

Someone approached the bed and drew back the curtains. Valentine
summoned every effort, and breathed with that regular respiration which
announces tranquil sleep.

“Valentine!” said a low voice.

“Valentine,” repeated the same voice.

Still silent: Valentine had promised not to wake. Then everything was
still, excepting that Valentine heard the almost noiseless sound of
some liquid being poured into the glass she had just emptied. Then she
ventured to open her eyelids, and glance over her extended arm. She saw
a woman in a white dressing-gown pouring a liquor from a phial into her
glass. During this short time Valentine must have held her breath, or
moved in some slight degree, for the woman, disturbed, stopped and
leaned over the bed, in order the better to ascertain whether Valentine
slept: it was Madame de Villefort.

On recognizing her step-mother, Valentine could not repress a shudder,
which caused a vibration in the bed. Madame de Villefort instantly
stepped back close to the wall, and there, shaded by the bed-curtains,
she silently and attentively watched the slightest movement of
Valentine. The latter recollected the terrible caution of Monte Cristo;
she fancied that the hand not holding the phial clasped a long sharp
knife. Then collecting all her remaining strength, she forced herself
to close her eyes; but this simple operation upon the most delicate
organs of our frame, generally so easy to accomplish, became almost
impossible at this moment, so much did curiosity struggle to retain the
eyelid open and learn the truth. Madame de Villefort, however,
reassured by the silence, which was alone disturbed by the regular
breathing of Valentine, again extended her hand, and half hidden by the
curtains succeeded in emptying the contents of the phial into the
glass. Then she retired so gently that Valentine did not know she had
left the room. She only witnessed the withdrawal of the arm—the fair
round arm of a woman but twenty-five years old, and who yet spread
death around her.

It is impossible to describe the sensations experienced by Valentine
during the minute and a half Madame de Villefort remained in the room.

“Did you recognize?” Valentine groaned.

“Valentine, the hand which now threatens you will pursue you
everywhere; your servants will be seduced with gold, and death will be
offered to you disguised in every shape. You will find it in the water
you drink from the spring, in the fruit you pluck from the tree.”

“Yes, but not against a strong dose; the poison will be changed, and
the quantity increased.” He took the glass and raised it to his lips.
“It is already done,” he said; “brucine is no longer employed, but a
simple narcotic! I can recognize the flavor of the alcohol in which it
has been dissolved. If you had taken what Madame de Villefort has
poured into your glass, Valentine—Valentine—you would have been
doomed!”

“Why?—are you so kind—so good—so unsuspicious of ill, that you cannot
understand, Valentine?”

“But you are rich, Valentine; you have 200,000 livres a year, and you
prevent her son from enjoying these 200,000 livres.”

“Valentine, you are an angel!”

“No, Valentine, for I have foreseen all their plots; no, your enemy is
conquered since we know her, and you will live, Valentine—live to be
happy yourself, and to confer happiness upon a noble heart; but to
insure this you must rely on me.”

“My father is not engaged in this fearful plot, is he, sir?” asked
Valentine, clasping her hands.

“Sir,” said Valentine, “I will do all I can to live, for there are two
beings who love me and will die if I die—my grandfather and
Maximilian.”

“Whatever may happen, Valentine, do not be alarmed; though you suffer;
though you lose sight, hearing, consciousness, fear nothing; though you
should awake and be ignorant where you are, still do not fear; even
though you should find yourself in a sepulchral vault or coffin.
Reassure yourself, then, and say to yourself: ‘At this moment, a
friend, a father, who lives for my happiness and that of Maximilian,
watches over me!’”

“Valentine, would you rather denounce your stepmother?”

“You are my own darling child, Valentine! I alone can save you, and I
will.”

Valentine in the extremity of her terror joined her hands,—for she felt
that the moment had arrived to ask for courage,—and began to pray, and
while uttering little more than incoherent words, she forgot that her
white shoulders had no other covering than her long hair, and that the
pulsations of her heart could be seen through the lace of her
nightdress. Monte Cristo gently laid his hand on the young girl’s arm,
drew the velvet coverlet close to her throat, and said with a paternal
smile:

“My child, believe in my devotion to you as you believe in the goodness
of Providence and the love of Maximilian.” Valentine gave him a look
full of gratitude, and remained as docile as a child.

Valentine carried the pastille to her mouth, and swallowed it.

“Go,” said Valentine, “whatever happens, I promise you not to fear.”

Monte Cristo for some time kept his eyes fixed on the young girl, who
gradually fell asleep, yielding to the effects of the narcotic the
count had given her. Then he took the glass, emptied three parts of the
contents in the fireplace, that it might be supposed Valentine had
taken it, and replaced it on the table; then he disappeared, after
throwing a farewell glance on Valentine, who slept with the confidence
and innocence of an angel at the feet of the Lord.

It was then that the door of Edward’s room opened, and a head we have
before noticed appeared in the glass opposite; it was Madame de
Villefort, who came to witness the effects of the drink she had
prepared. She stopped in the doorway, listened for a moment to the
flickering of the lamp, the only sound in that deserted room, and then
advanced to the table to see if Valentine’s glass were empty. It was
still about a quarter full, as we before stated. Madame de Villefort
emptied the contents into the ashes, which she disturbed that they
might the more readily absorb the liquid; then she carefully rinsed the
glass, and wiping it with her handkerchief replaced it on the table.

If anyone could have looked into the room just then he would have
noticed the hesitation with which Madame de Villefort approached the
bed and looked fixedly on Valentine. The dim light, the profound
silence, and the gloomy thoughts inspired by the hour, and still more
by her own conscience, all combined to produce a sensation of fear; the
poisoner was terrified at the contemplation of her own work.

At length she rallied, drew aside the curtain, and leaning over the
pillow gazed intently on Valentine. The young girl no longer breathed,
no breath issued through the half-closed teeth; the white lips no
longer quivered—the eyes were suffused with a bluish vapor, and the
long black lashes rested on a cheek white as wax. Madame de Villefort
gazed upon the face so expressive even in its stillness; then she
ventured to raise the coverlet and press her hand upon the young girl’s
heart. It was cold and motionless. She only felt the pulsation in her
own fingers, and withdrew her hand with a shudder. One arm was hanging
out of the bed; from shoulder to elbow it was moulded after the arms of
Germain Pillon’s “Graces,”23 but the fore-arm seemed to be slightly
distorted by convulsion, and the hand, so delicately formed, was
resting with stiff outstretched fingers on the framework of the bed.
The nails, too, were turning blue.

The minutes passed; Madame de Villefort could not drop the curtain
which she held like a funeral pall over the head of Valentine. She was
lost in reverie, and the reverie of crime is remorse.

About this time the nurse’s cough was heard on the stairs and the woman
entered the room with a cup in her hand. To the tender eye of a father
or a lover, the first glance would have sufficed to reveal Valentine’s
condition; but to this hireling, Valentine only appeared to sleep.

Then she went to the fireplace and lit the fire, and although she had
just left her bed, she could not resist the temptation offered by
Valentine’s sleep, so she threw herself into an armchair to snatch a
little more rest. The clock striking eight awoke her. Astonished at the
prolonged slumber of the patient, and frightened to see that the arm
was still hanging out of the bed, she advanced towards Valentine, and
for the first time noticed the white lips. She tried to replace the
arm, but it moved with a frightful rigidity which could not deceive a
sick-nurse. She screamed aloud; then running to the door exclaimed:

“Yes, yes; let us hasten up; it was in Valentine’s room.”

But before the doctor and the father could reach the room, the servants
who were on the same floor had entered, and seeing Valentine pale and
motionless on her bed, they lifted up their hands towards heaven and
stood transfixed, as though struck by lightening.

“Call Madame de Villefort!—Wake Madame de Villefort!” cried the
procureur from the door of his chamber, which apparently he scarcely
dared to leave. But instead of obeying him, the servants stood watching
M. d’Avrigny, who ran to Valentine, and raised her in his arms.

“I say that Valentine is dead!” replied d’Avrigny, in a voice terrible
in its solemn calmness.

Just then, Madame de Villefort, in the act of slipping on her
dressing-gown, threw aside the drapery and for a moment stood
motionless, as though interrogating the occupants of the room, while
she endeavored to call up some rebellious tears. On a sudden she
stepped, or rather bounded, with outstretched arms, towards the table.
She saw d’Avrigny curiously examining the glass, which she felt certain
of having emptied during the night. It was now a third full, just as it
was when she threw the contents into the ashes. The spectre of
Valentine rising before the poisoner would have alarmed her less. It
was, indeed, the same color as the draught she had poured into the
glass, and which Valentine had drunk; it was indeed the poison, which
could not deceive M. d’Avrigny, which he now examined so closely; it
was doubtless a miracle from heaven, that, notwithstanding her
precautions, there should be some trace, some proof remaining to reveal
the crime.

Then he ran to one of the cupboards in Valentine’s room, which had been
transformed into a medicine closet, and taking from its silver case a
small bottle of nitric acid, dropped a little of it into the liquor,
which immediately changed to a blood-red color.

“Dead!” repeated a third voice. “Who said Valentine was dead?”

The two men turned round, and saw Morrel standing at the door, pale and
terror-stricken. This is what had happened. At the usual time, Morrel
had presented himself at the little door leading to Noirtier’s room.
Contrary to custom, the door was open, and having no occasion to ring
he entered. He waited for a moment in the hall and called for a servant
to conduct him to M. Noirtier; but no one answered, the servants
having, as we know, deserted the house. Morrel had no particular reason
for uneasiness; Monte Cristo had promised him that Valentine should
live, and so far he had always fulfilled his word. Every night the
count had given him news, which was the next morning confirmed by
Noirtier. Still this extraordinary silence appeared strange to him, and
he called a second and third time; still no answer. Then he determined
to go up. Noirtier’s room was opened, like all the rest. The first
thing he saw was the old man sitting in his armchair in his usual
place, but his eyes expressed alarm, which was confirmed by the pallor
which overspread his features.

“Oh,” exclaimed Morrel, “why do they not come? Is anyone ill in the
house?” The eyes of Noirtier seemed as though they would start from
their sockets. “What is the matter? You alarm me. Valentine?
Valentine?”

In a minute the young man darted through several rooms, till at length
he reached Valentine’s.

There was no occasion to push the door, it was wide open. A sob was the
only sound he heard. He saw as though in a mist, a black figure
kneeling and buried in a confused mass of white drapery. A terrible
fear transfixed him. It was then he heard a voice exclaim “Valentine is
dead!” and another voice which, like an echo repeated:

But in less than five minutes the staircase groaned beneath an
extraordinary weight. Morrel was seen carrying, with superhuman
strength, the armchair containing Noirtier upstairs. When he reached
the landing he placed the armchair on the floor and rapidly rolled it
into Valentine’s room. This could only have been accomplished by means
of unnatural strength supplied by powerful excitement. But the most
fearful spectacle was Noirtier being pushed towards the bed, his face
expressing all his meaning, and his eyes supplying the want of every
other faculty. That pale face and flaming glance appeared to Villefort
like a frightful apparition. Each time he had been brought into contact
with his father, something terrible had happened.

“See what they have done!” cried Morrel, with one hand leaning on the
back of the chair, and the other extended towards Valentine. “See, my
father, see!”

But Morrel saw nothing; he had grasped the hand of Valentine, and
unable to weep vented his agony in groans as he bit the sheets. For
some time nothing was heard in that chamber but sobs, exclamations, and
prayers. At length Villefort, the most composed of all, spoke:

“Sir,” said he to Maximilian, “you say you loved Valentine, that you
were betrothed to her. I knew nothing of this engagement, of this love,
yet I, her father, forgive you, for I see that your grief is real and
deep; and besides my own sorrow is too great for anger to find a place
in my heart. But you see that the angel whom you hoped for has left
this earth—she has nothing more to do with the adoration of men. Take a
last farewell, sir, of her sad remains; take the hand you expected to
possess once more within your own, and then separate yourself from her
forever. Valentine now requires only the ministrations of the priest.”

“You are mistaken, sir,” exclaimed Morrel, raising himself on one knee,
his heart pierced by a more acute pang than any he had yet felt—“you
are mistaken; Valentine, dying as she has, not only requires a priest,
but an avenger. _You_, M. de Villefort, send for the priest; _I_ will
be the avenger.”

“Gentlemen,” said Morrel, reading all that passed through the minds of
the witnesses to the scene, “I know what I am saying, and you know as
well as I do what I am about to say—Valentine has been assassinated!”

“Now, sir,” continued Morrel, “in these days no one can disappear by
violent means without some inquiries being made as to the cause of her
disappearance, even were she not a young, beautiful, and adorable
creature like Valentine. Now, M. le Procureur du Roi,” said Morrel with
increasing vehemence, “no mercy is allowed; I denounce the crime; it is
your place to seek the assassin.”

“And I say that murders _are_ committed here,” said Morrel, whose
voice, though lower in tone, lost none of its terrible distinctness: “I
tell you that this is the fourth victim within the last four months. I
tell you, Valentine’s life was attempted by poison four days ago,
though she escaped, owing to the precautions of M. Noirtier. I tell you
that the dose has been double, the poison changed, and that this time
it has succeeded. I tell you that you know these things as well as I
do, since this gentleman has forewarned you, both as a doctor and as a
friend.”

“I rave?” said Morrel; “well, then, I appeal to M. d’Avrigny himself.
Ask him, sir, if he recollects the words he uttered in the garden of
this house on the night of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death. You thought
yourselves alone, and talked about that tragical death, and the
fatality you mentioned then is the same which has caused the murder of
Valentine.” Villefort and d’Avrigny exchanged looks.

“Yes, yes,” continued Morrel; “recall the scene, for the words you
thought were only given to silence and solitude fell into my ears.
Certainly, after witnessing the culpable indolence manifested by M. de
Villefort towards his own relations, I ought to have denounced him to
the authorities; then I should not have been an accomplice to thy
death, as I now am, sweet, beloved Valentine; but the accomplice shall
become the avenger. This fourth murder is apparent to all, and if thy
father abandon thee, Valentine, it is I, and I swear it, that shall
pursue the assassin.”

Noirtier looked upon Morrel with one of those melancholy smiles which
had so often made Valentine happy, and thus fixed his attention. Then,
having riveted the eyes of his interlocutor on his own, he glanced
towards the door.

“Oh, sir,” said Villefort, arresting Maximilian by the arm, “if my
father, the inflexible man, makes this request, it is because he knows,
be assured, that Valentine will be terribly revenged. Is it not so,
father?”

D’Avrigny turned round and uttered a very feeble “Yes,” but Morrel,
disengaging his hand, rushed to the bed, and after having pressed the
cold lips of Valentine with his own, hurriedly left, uttering a long,
deep groan of despair and anguish.

“Is there any particular priest you wish to pray with Valentine?” asked
d’Avrigny.

“I know it, sir; the servants who fled from the house informed me. I
also know that her name is Valentine, and I have already prayed for
her.”

D’Avrigny took the priest’s hand, and without meeting Villefort, who
was engaged in his study, they reached Valentine’s room, which on the
following night was to be occupied by the undertakers. On entering the
room, Noirtier’s eyes met those of the abbé, and no doubt he read some
particular expression in them, for he remained in the room. D’Avrigny
recommended the attention of the priest to the living as well as to the
dead, and the abbé promised to devote his prayers to Valentine and his
attentions to Noirtier.

During the evening two men, engaged for the purpose, had carried
Noirtier from Valentine’s room into his own, and contrary to all
expectation there was no difficulty in withdrawing him from his child.
The Abbé Busoni had watched till daylight, and then left without
calling anyone. D’Avrigny returned about eight o’clock in the morning;
he met Villefort on his way to Noirtier’s room, and accompanied him to
see how the old man had slept. They found him in the large armchair,
which served him for a bed, enjoying a calm, nay, almost a smiling
sleep. They both stood in amazement at the door.

M. de Boville had indeed met the funeral procession which was taking
Valentine to her last home on earth. The weather was dull and stormy, a
cold wind shook the few remaining yellow leaves from the boughs of the
trees, and scattered them among the crowd which filled the boulevards.
M. de Villefort, a true Parisian, considered the cemetery of
Père-Lachaise alone worthy of receiving the mortal remains of a
Parisian family; there alone the corpses belonging to him would be
surrounded by worthy associates. He had therefore purchased a vault,
which was quickly occupied by members of his family. On the front of
the monument was inscribed: “The families of Saint-Méran and
Villefort,” for such had been the last wish expressed by poor Renée,
Valentine’s mother. The pompous procession therefore wended its way
towards Père-Lachaise from the Faubourg Saint-Honoré. Having crossed
Paris, it passed through the Faubourg du Temple, then leaving the
exterior boulevards, it reached the cemetery. More than fifty private
carriages followed the twenty mourning-coaches, and behind them more
than five hundred persons joined in the procession on foot.

These last consisted of all the young people whom Valentine’s death had
struck like a thunderbolt, and who, notwithstanding the raw chilliness
of the season, could not refrain from paying a last tribute to the
memory of the beautiful, chaste, and adorable girl, thus cut off in the
flower of her youth.

Everything was conducted in the usual manner. A few men, the least
impressed of all by the scene, pronounced a discourse, some deploring
this premature death, others expatiating on the grief of the father,
and one very ingenious person quoting the fact that Valentine had
solicited pardon of her father for criminals on whom the arm of justice
was ready to fall—until at length they exhausted their stores of
metaphor and mournful speeches, elaborate variations on the stanzas of
Malherbe to Du Périer.

“Ah,” exclaimed Morrel, interrupting the count, “you had only lost your
liberty, my father had only lost his fortune, but I have lost
Valentine.”

“I mean, as I love. You see, I have been a soldier ever since I
attained manhood. I reached the age of twenty-nine without loving, for
none of the feelings I before then experienced merit the appellation of
love. Well, at twenty-nine I saw Valentine; for two years I have loved
her, for two years I have seen written in her heart, as in a book, all
the virtues of a daughter and wife. Count, to possess Valentine would
have been a happiness too infinite, too ecstatic, too complete, too
divine for this world, since it has been denied me; but without
Valentine the earth is desolate.”

“Then have a care, I repeat, for you seek to persuade me, and if you
succeed I should lose my reason, for I should hope that I could again
behold Valentine.”

“I feel so much pity towards you, Maximilian, that—listen to me
attentively—if I do not cure you in a month, to the day, to the very
hour, mark my words, Morrel, I will place loaded pistols before you,
and a cup of the deadliest Italian poison—a poison more sure and prompt
than that which has killed Valentine.”

We remember that the Abbé Busoni remained alone with Noirtier in the
chamber of death, and that the old man and the priest were the sole
guardians of the young girl’s body. Perhaps it was the Christian
exhortations of the abbé, perhaps his kind charity, perhaps his
persuasive words, which had restored the courage of Noirtier, for ever
since he had conversed with the priest his violent despair had yielded
to a calm resignation which surprised all who knew his excessive
affection for Valentine.

The case was therefore prepared owing to the incessant labor of
Villefort, who wished it to be the first on the list in the coming
assizes. He had been obliged to seclude himself more than ever, to
evade the enormous number of applications presented to him for the
purpose of obtaining tickets of admission to the court on the day of
trial. And then so short a time had elapsed since the death of poor
Valentine, and the gloom which overshadowed the house was so recent,
that no one wondered to see the father so absorbed in his professional
duties, which were the only means he had of dissipating his grief.

“I asked you,” continued Villefort, in a perfectly calm tone, “where
you conceal the poison by the aid of which you have killed my
father-in-law, M. de Saint-Méran, my mother-in-law, Madame de
Saint-Méran, Barrois, and my daughter Valentine.”

“You do not answer, madame!” exclaimed the terrible interrogator. Then
he added, with a smile yet more terrible than his anger, “It is true,
then; you do not deny it!” She moved forward. “And you cannot deny it!”
added Villefort, extending his hand toward her, as though to seize her
in the name of justice. “You have accomplished these different crimes
with impudent address, but which could only deceive those whose
affections for you blinded them. Since the death of Madame de
Saint-Méran, I have known that a poisoner lived in my house. M.
d’Avrigny warned me of it. After the death of Barrois my suspicions
were directed towards an angel,—those suspicions which, even when there
is no crime, are always alive in my heart; but after the death of
Valentine, there has been no doubt in my mind, madame, and not only in
mine, but in those of others; thus your crime, known by two persons,
suspected by many, will soon become public, and, as I told you just
now, you no longer speak to the husband, but to the judge.”

“Yes; you were telling us about the extraordinary death of Valentine.”

“It appears the dear child has obtained possession of a bottle
containing some drug, which he every now and then uses against those
who have displeased him. First, M. and Madame de Saint-Méran incurred
his displeasure, so he poured out three drops of his elixir—three drops
were sufficient; then followed Barrois, the old servant of M. Noirtier,
who sometimes rebuffed this little wretch—he therefore received the
same quantity of the elixir; the same happened to Valentine, of whom he
was jealous; he gave her the same dose as the others, and all was over
for her as well as the rest.”

He recollected the call he had made upon him after the dinner at
Auteuil, and then the visit the abbé had himself paid to his house on
the day of Valentine’s death.

Monte Cristo became pale at this horrible sight; he felt that he had
passed beyond the bounds of vengeance, and that he could no longer say,
“God is for and with me.” With an expression of indescribable anguish
he threw himself upon the body of the child, reopened its eyes, felt
its pulse, and then rushed with him into Valentine’s room, of which he
double-locked the door.

A quarter of an hour afterwards the door of Valentine’s room opened,
and Monte Cristo reappeared. Pale, with a dull eye and heavy heart, all
the noble features of that face, usually so calm and serene, were
overcast by grief. In his arms he held the child, whom no skill had
been able to recall to life. Bending on one knee, he placed it
reverently by the side of its mother, with its head upon her breast.
Then, rising, he went out, and meeting a servant on the stairs, he
asked:

“What dreadful sufferings!” said Julie, remembering Valentine, but
whom, with a delicacy natural to women, she did not name before her
brother.

And pressing his lips on the hand of Julie, who rushed into his arms,
he extended his other hand to Emmanuel; then tearing himself from this
abode of peace and happiness, he made a sign to Maximilian, who
followed him passively, with the indifference which had been
perceptible in him ever since the death of Valentine had so stunned
him.

“Valentine reposes within the walls of Paris, and to leave Paris is
like losing her a second time.”

Morrel extended his hand. “Now I understand,” he said, “why you had me
brought here to this desolate spot, in the midst of the ocean, to this
subterranean palace; it was because you loved me, was it not, count? It
was because you loved me well enough to give me one of those sweet
means of death of which we were speaking; a death without agony, a
death which allows me to fade away while pronouncing Valentine’s name
and pressing your hand.”

“Stay!” said the young man. “You who love, and are beloved; you, who
have faith and hope,—oh, do not follow my example. In your case it
would be a crime. Adieu, my noble and generous friend, adieu; I will go
and tell Valentine what you have done for me.”

“Valentine, Valentine!” he mentally ejaculated; but his lips uttered no
sound, and as though all his strength were centred in that internal
emotion, he sighed and closed his eyes. Valentine rushed towards him;
his lips again moved.

“He is calling you,” said the count; “he to whom you have confided your
destiny—he from whom death would have separated you, calls you to him.
Happily, I vanquished death. Henceforth, Valentine, you will never
again be separated on earth, since he has rushed into death to find
you. Without me, you would both have died. May God accept my atonement
in the preservation of these two existences!”

Valentine seized the count’s hand, and in her irresistible impulse of
joy carried it to her lips.

“Oh, yes, yes, I thank you with all my heart,” said Valentine; “and if
you doubt the sincerity of my gratitude, oh, then, ask Haydée! ask my
beloved sister Haydée, who ever since our departure from France, has
caused me to wait patiently for this happy day, while talking to me of
you.”

“Well, then, listen, Valentine,” said the count; “I have a favor to ask
of you.”

“Yes; you have called Haydée your sister,—let her become so indeed,
Valentine; render her all the gratitude you fancy that you owe to me;
protect her, for” (the count’s voice was thick with emotion)
“henceforth she will be alone in the world.”

“Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Valentine, who was supporting the head of
Morrel on her shoulder, “do you not see how pale she is? Do you not see
how she suffers?”

“Oh, Valentine, he asks if I love him. Valentine, tell him if you love
Maximilian.”

“Do you hear him, Valentine?” exclaimed Haydée; “he says that through
me he will suffer—through _me_, who would yield my life for his.”

The count withdrew for a moment. “Have I discovered the truth?” he
said; “but whether it be for recompense or punishment, I accept my
fate. Come, Haydée, come!” and throwing his arm around the young girl’s
waist, he pressed the hand of Valentine, and disappeared.

An hour had nearly passed, during which Valentine, breathless and
motionless, watched steadfastly over Morrel. At length she felt his
heart beat, a faint breath played upon his lips, a slight shudder,
announcing the return of life, passed through the young man’s frame. At
length his eyes opened, but they were at first fixed and
expressionless; then sight returned, and with it feeling and grief.

“Dearest,” exclaimed Valentine, with her adorable smile, “awake, and
look at me!” Morrel uttered a loud exclamation, and frantic, doubtful,
dazzled, as though by a celestial vision, he fell upon his knees.

The next morning at daybreak, Valentine and Morrel were walking
arm-in-arm on the seashore, Valentine relating how Monte Cristo had
appeared in her room, explained everything, revealed the crime, and,
finally, how he had saved her life by enabling her to simulate death.

Morrel soon perceived a man standing among the rocks, apparently
awaiting a sign from them to advance, and pointed him out to Valentine.

During the perusal of this letter, which informed Valentine for the
first time of the madness of her father and the death of her brother,
she became pale, a heavy sigh escaped from her bosom, and tears, not
the less painful because they were silent, ran down her cheeks; her
happiness cost her very dear.

“But,” he said, “the count’s generosity is too overwhelming; Valentine
will be satisfied with my humble fortune. Where is the count, friend?
Lead me to him.”

“What do you mean?” asked Valentine. “Where is the count?—where is
Haydée?”

“Gone,” murmured Valentine; “adieu, my sweet Haydée—adieu, my sister!”

“Darling,” replied Valentine, “has not the count just told us that all
human wisdom is summed up in two words: