“True, Dantès, I forgot that there was at the Catalans someone who
expects you no less impatiently than your father—the lovely Mercédès.”

“Ah, M. Morrel,” exclaimed the young seaman, with tears in his eyes,
and grasping the owner’s hand, “M. Morrel, I thank you in the name of
my father and of Mercédès.”

“That’s all right, Edmond. There’s a providence that watches over the
deserving. Go to your father; go and see Mercédès, and afterwards come
to me.”

“Mercédès?” said the old man.

“Because Mercédès is a very fine girl, and fine girls never lack
followers; she particularly has them by dozens.”

“Come, come,” said the sailor, “I have a better opinion than you of
women in general, and of Mercédès in particular; and I am certain that,
captain or not, she will remain ever faithful to me.”

“Well, every time I have seen Mercédès come into the city she has been
accompanied by a tall, strapping, black-eyed Catalan, with a red
complexion, brown skin, and fierce air, whom she calls cousin.”

“You see, Mercédès,” said the young man, “here is Easter come round
again; tell me, is this the moment for a wedding?”

“Well, repeat it,—repeat it, I beg of you, that I may at last believe
it! Tell me for the hundredth time that you refuse my love, which had
your mother’s sanction. Make me understand once for all that you are
trifling with my happiness, that my life or death are nothing to you.
Ah, to have dreamed for ten years of being your husband, Mercédès, and
to lose that hope, which was the only stay of my existence!”

“At least it was not I who ever encouraged you in that hope, Fernand,”
replied Mercédès; “you cannot reproach me with the slightest coquetry.
I have always said to you, ‘I love you as a brother; but do not ask
from me more than sisterly affection, for my heart is another’s.’ Is
not this true, Fernand?”

“Yes, that is very true, Mercédès,” replied the young man, “Yes, you
have been cruelly frank with me; but do you forget that it is among the
Catalans a sacred law to intermarry?”

“And if it were, Mercédès, poor and lone as you are, you suit me as
well as the daughter of the first shipowner or the richest banker of
Marseilles! What do such as we desire but a good wife and careful
housekeeper, and where can I look for these better than in you?”

“Fernand,” answered Mercédès, shaking her head, “a woman becomes a bad
manager, and who shall say she will remain an honest woman, when she
loves another man better than her husband? Rest content with my
friendship, for I say once more that is all I can promise, and I will
promise no more than I can bestow.”

“I understand,” replied Fernand, “you can endure your own wretchedness
patiently, but you are afraid to share mine. Well, Mercédès, beloved by
you, I would tempt fortune; you would bring me good luck, and I should
become rich. I could extend my occupation as a fisherman, might get a
place as clerk in a warehouse, and become in time a dealer myself.”

“Well, I will do better, Mercédès. I will be a sailor; instead of the
costume of our fathers, which you despise, I will wear a varnished hat,
a striped shirt, and a blue jacket, with an anchor on the buttons.
Would not that dress please you?”

“What do you mean?” asked Mercédès, with an angry glance,—“what do you
mean? I do not understand you?”

“I mean, Mercédès, that you are thus harsh and cruel with me, because
you are expecting someone who is thus attired; but perhaps he whom you
await is inconstant, or if he is not, the sea is so to him.”

“Fernand,” cried Mercédès, “I believed you were good-hearted, and I was
mistaken! Fernand, you are wicked to call to your aid jealousy and the
anger of God! Yes, I will not deny it, I do await, and I do love him of
whom you speak; and, if he does not return, instead of accusing him of
the inconstancy which you insinuate, I will tell you that he died
loving me and me only.” The young girl made a gesture of rage. “I
understand you, Fernand; you would be revenged on him because I do not
love you; you would cross your Catalan knife with his dirk. What end
would that answer? To lose you my friendship if he were conquered, and
see that friendship changed into hate if you were victor. Believe me,
to seek a quarrel with a man is a bad method of pleasing the woman who
loves that man. No, Fernand, you will not thus give way to evil
thoughts. Unable to have me for your wife, you will content yourself
with having me for your friend and sister; and besides,” she added, her
eyes troubled and moistened with tears, “wait, wait, Fernand; you said
just now that the sea was treacherous, and he has been gone four
months, and during these four months there have been some terrible
storms.”

Fernand made no reply, nor did he attempt to check the tears which
flowed down the cheeks of Mercédès, although for each of these tears he
would have shed his heart’s blood; but these tears flowed for another.
He arose, paced a while up and down the hut, and then, suddenly
stopping before Mercédès, with his eyes glowing and his hands
clenched,—“Say, Mercédès,” he said, “once for all, is this your final
determination?”

“Mercédès!” called a joyous voice from without,—“Mercédès!”

Fernand, pale and trembling, drew back, like a traveller at the sight
of a serpent, and fell into a chair beside him. Edmond and Mercédès
were clasped in each other’s arms. The burning Marseilles sun, which
shot into the room through the open door, covered them with a flood of
light. At first they saw nothing around them. Their intense happiness
isolated them from all the rest of the world, and they only spoke in
broken words, which are the tokens of a joy so extreme that they seem
rather the expression of sorrow. Suddenly Edmond saw the gloomy, pale,
and threatening countenance of Fernand, as it was defined in the
shadow. By a movement for which he could scarcely account to himself,
the young Catalan placed his hand on the knife at his belt.

“Ah, your pardon,” said Dantès, frowning in his turn; “I did not
perceive that there were three of us.” Then, turning to Mercédès, he
inquired, “Who is this gentleman?”

“Yes!” said Dantès, and without relinquishing Mercédès’ hand clasped in
one of his own, he extended the other to the Catalan with a cordial
air. But Fernand, instead of responding to this amiable gesture,
remained mute and trembling. Edmond then cast his eyes scrutinizingly
at the agitated and embarrassed Mercédès, and then again on the gloomy
and menacing Fernand. This look told him all, and his anger waxed hot.

“An enemy!” cried Mercédès, with an angry look at her cousin. “An enemy
in my house, do you say, Edmond! If I believed that, I would place my
arm under yours and go with you to Marseilles, leaving the house to
return to it no more.”

And at these words the young girl fixed her imperious look on the
Catalan, who, as if fascinated by it, came slowly towards Edmond, and
offered him his hand. His hatred, like a powerless though furious wave,
was broken against the strong ascendancy which Mercédès exercised over
him. Scarcely, however, had he touched Edmond’s hand when he felt he
had done all he could do, and rushed hastily out of the house.

“Ah, you see, Danglars,” said Caderousse, winking at his friend, “this
is how it is; Fernand, whom you see here, is a good and brave Catalan,
one of the best fishermen in Marseilles, and he is in love with a very
fine girl, named Mercédès; but it appears, unfortunately, that the fine
girl is in love with the mate of the _Pharaon_; and as the _Pharaon_
arrived today—why, you understand!”

“Well, and what then?” said Fernand, lifting up his head, and looking
at Caderousse like a man who looks for someone on whom to vent his
anger; “Mercédès is not accountable to any person, is she? Is she not
free to love whomsoever she will?”

“Well, never mind,” answered Caderousse, pouring out a glass of wine
for Fernand, and filling his own for the eighth or ninth time, while
Danglars had merely sipped his. “Never mind—in the meantime he marries
Mercédès—the lovely Mercédès—at least he returns to do that.”

“Yes,” was the reply, in a low voice. “It is Edmond and Mercédès!”

Fernand, probably excited beyond bearing, pricked by Danglars, as the
bull is by the bandilleros, was about to rush out; for he had risen
from his seat, and seemed to be collecting himself to dash headlong
upon his rival, when Mercédès, smiling and graceful, lifted up her
lovely head, and looked at them with her clear and bright eyes. At this
Fernand recollected her threat of dying if Edmond died, and dropped
again heavily on his seat. Danglars looked at the two men, one after
the other, the one brutalized by liquor, the other overwhelmed with
love.

Mercédès courtesied gravely, and said—“That is not my name, and in my
country it bodes ill fortune, they say, to call a young girl by the
name of her betrothed before he becomes her husband. So call me
Mercédès, if you please.”

“My wife’s brother is my brother,” said Edmond; “and we, Mercédès and
I, should be very sorry if he were absent at such a time.”

“Danglars,” said Edmond, smiling, “I will say to you as Mercédès said
just now to Caderousse, ‘Do not give me a title which does not belong
to me’; that may bring me bad luck.”

Danglars followed Edmond and Mercédès with his eyes until the two
lovers disappeared behind one of the angles of Fort Saint Nicolas;
then, turning round, he perceived Fernand, who had fallen, pale and
trembling, into his chair, while Caderousse stammered out the words of
a drinking-song.

“Do you, then, love Mercédès?”

“How do I know? Is it my affair? I am not in love with Mademoiselle
Mercédès; but for you—in the words of the gospel, seek, and you shall
find.”

“You do not know Mercédès; what she threatens she will do.”

“Before Mercédès should die,” replied Fernand, with the accents of
unshaken resolution, “I would die myself!”

Fernand rose impatiently. “Let him run on,” said Danglars, restraining
the young man; “drunk as he is, he is not much out in what he says.
Absence severs as well as death, and if the walls of a prison were
between Edmond and Mercédès they would be as effectually separated as
if he lay under a tombstone.”

“No, no,” said Fernand, restraining him, “stay! It is of very little
consequence to me at the end of the matter whether you have any angry
feeling or not against Dantès. I hate him! I confess it openly. Do you
find the means, I will execute it, provided it is not to kill the man,
for Mercédès has declared she will kill herself if Dantès is killed.”

“Yes, and Mercédès! Mercédès, who will detest you if you have only the
misfortune to scratch the skin of her dearly beloved Edmond!”

“In this case,” replied Caderousse, “let’s have some more wine. I wish
to drink to the health of Edmond and the lovely Mercédès.”

Neither Mercédès nor Edmond observed the strange expression of his
countenance; they were so happy that they were conscious only of the
sunshine and the presence of each other.

Lovely as the Greek girls of Cyprus or Chios, Mercédès boasted the same
bright flashing eyes of jet, and ripe, round, coral lips. She moved
with the light, free step of an Arlesienne or an Andalusian. One more
practiced in the arts of great cities would have hid her blushes
beneath a veil, or, at least, have cast down her thickly fringed
lashes, so as to have concealed the liquid lustre of her animated eyes;
but, on the contrary, the delighted girl looked around her with a smile
that seemed to say: “If you are my friends, rejoice with me, for I am
very happy.”

“Father,” said Mercédès, stopping when she had reached the centre of
the table, “sit, I pray you, on my right hand; on my left I will place
him who has ever been as a brother to me,” pointing with a soft and
gentle smile to Fernand; but her words and look seemed to inflict the
direst torture on him, for his lips became ghastly pale, and even
beneath the dark hue of his complexion the blood might be seen
retreating as though some sudden pang drove it back to the heart.

“A pretty silence truly!” said the old father of the bridegroom, as he
carried to his lips a glass of wine of the hue and brightness of the
topaz, and which had just been placed before Mercédès herself. “Now,
would anybody think that this room contained a happy, merry party, who
desire nothing better than to laugh and dance the hours away?”

“And that is the very thing that alarms me,” returned Dantès. “Man does
not appear to me to be intended to enjoy felicity so unmixed; happiness
is like the enchanted palaces we read of in our childhood, where
fierce, fiery dragons defend the entrance and approach; and monsters of
all shapes and kinds, requiring to be overcome ere victory is ours. I
own that I am lost in wonder to find myself promoted to an honor of
which I feel myself unworthy—that of being the husband of Mercédès.”

“Nay, nay!” cried Caderousse, smiling, “you have not attained that
honor yet. Mercédès is not yet your wife. Just assume the tone and
manner of a husband, and see how she will remind you that your hour is
not yet come!”

“Well, never mind that, neighbor Caderousse; it is not worthwhile to
contradict me for such a trifle as that. ’Tis true that Mercédès is not
actually my wife; but,” added he, drawing out his watch, “in an hour
and a half she will be.”

A general exclamation of surprise ran round the table, with the
exception of the elder Dantès, whose laugh displayed the still perfect
beauty of his large white teeth. Mercédès looked pleased and gratified,
while Fernand grasped the handle of his knife with a convulsive clutch.

“Why, thus it is,” replied Dantès. “Thanks to the influence of M.
Morrel, to whom, next to my father, I owe every blessing I enjoy, every
difficulty has been removed. We have purchased permission to waive the
usual delay; and at half-past two o’clock the Mayor of Marseilles will
be waiting for us at the city hall. Now, as a quarter-past one has
already struck, I do not consider I have asserted too much in saying,
that, in another hour and thirty minutes Mercédès will have become
Madame Dantès.”

“The contract,” answered Dantès, laughingly, “it didn’t take long to
fix that. Mercédès has no fortune; I have none to settle on her. So,
you see, our papers were quickly written out, and certainly do not come
very expensive.” This joke elicited a fresh burst of applause.

Dantès, perceiving the affectionate eagerness of his father, responded
by a look of grateful pleasure; while Mercédès glanced at the clock and
made an expressive gesture to Edmond.

“Shall we not set forth?” asked the sweet, silvery voice of Mercédès;
“two o’clock has just struck, and you know we are expected in a quarter
of an hour.”

“Adieu, adieu, dearest Edmond!” cried Mercédès, stretching out her arms
to him from the balcony.

The prisoner heard the cry, which sounded like the sob of a broken
heart, and leaning from the coach he called out, “Good-bye, Mercédès—we
shall soon meet again!” Then the vehicle disappeared round one of the
turnings of Fort Saint Nicholas.

This second departure was followed by a long and fearful state of
terrified silence on the part of those who were left behind. The old
father and Mercédès remained for some time apart, each absorbed in
grief; but at length the two poor victims of the same blow raised their
eyes, and with a simultaneous burst of feeling rushed into each other’s
arms.

Meanwhile Fernand made his appearance, poured out for himself a glass
of water with a trembling hand; then hastily swallowing it, went to sit
down at the first vacant place, and this was, by mere chance, placed
next to the seat on which poor Mercédès had fallen half fainting, when
released from the warm and affectionate embrace of old Dantès.
Instinctively Fernand drew back his chair.

Mercédès, however, paid no heed to this explanation of her lover’s
arrest. Her grief, which she had hitherto tried to restrain, now burst
out in a violent fit of hysterical sobbing.

Mercédès and the old man rushed to meet the shipowner and greeted him
at the door. He was very pale.

“Oh, indeed—indeed, sir, he is innocent!” sobbed forth Mercédès.

A despairing cry escaped the pale lips of Mercédès; the old man sank
into a chair.

After their departure, Fernand, who had now again become the friend and
protector of Mercédès, led the girl to her home, while some friends of
Dantès conducted his father, nearly lifeless, to the Allées de Meilhan.

“I was at the festival of my marriage, monsieur,” said the young man,
his voice slightly tremulous, so great was the contrast between that
happy moment and the painful ceremony he was now undergoing; so great
was the contrast between the sombre aspect of M. de Villefort and the
radiant face of Mercédès.

“My political opinions!” replied Dantès. “Alas, sir, I never had any
opinions. I am hardly nineteen; I know nothing; I have no part to play.
If I obtain the situation I desire, I shall owe it to M. Morrel. Thus
all my opinions—I will not say public, but private—are confined to
these three sentiments,—I love my father, I respect M. Morrel, and I
adore Mercédès. This, sir, is all I can tell you, and you see how
uninteresting it is.” As Dantès spoke, Villefort gazed at his ingenuous
and open countenance, and recollected the words of Renée, who, without
knowing who the culprit was, had besought his indulgence for him. With
the deputy’s knowledge of crime and criminals, every word the young man
uttered convinced him more and more of his innocence. This lad, for he
was scarcely a man,—simple, natural, eloquent with that eloquence of
the heart never found when sought for; full of affection for everybody,
because he was happy, and because happiness renders even the wicked
good—extended his affection even to his judge, spite of Villefort’s
severe look and stern accent. Dantès seemed full of kindness.

“None at all. I will tell you the real facts. I swear by my honor as a
sailor, by my love for Mercédès, by the life of my father——”

They had left the Ile Ratonneau, where the lighthouse stood, on the
right, and were now opposite the Point des Catalans. It seemed to the
prisoner that he could distinguish a feminine form on the beach, for it
was there Mercédès dwelt. How was it that a presentiment did not warn
Mercédès that her lover was within three hundred yards of her?

One light alone was visible; and Dantès saw that it came from Mercédès’
chamber. Mercédès was the only one awake in the whole settlement. A
loud cry could be heard by her. But pride restrained him and he did not
utter it. What would his guards think if they heard him shout like a
madman?

He remained silent, his eyes fixed upon the light; the boat went on,
but the prisoner thought only of Mercédès. An intervening elevation of
land hid the light. Dantès turned and perceived that they had got out
to sea. While he had been absorbed in thought, they had shipped their
oars and hoisted sail; the boat was now moving with the wind.

The day passed thus; he scarcely tasted food, but walked round and
round the cell like a wild beast in its cage. One thought in particular
tormented him: namely, that during his journey hither he had sat so
still, whereas he might, a dozen times, have plunged into the sea, and,
thanks to his powers of swimming, for which he was famous, have gained
the shore, concealed himself until the arrival of a Genoese or Spanish
vessel, escaped to Spain or Italy, where Mercédès and his father could
have joined him. He had no fears as to how he should live—good seamen
are welcome everywhere. He spoke Italian like a Tuscan, and Spanish
like a Castilian; he would have been free, and happy with Mercédès and
his father, whereas he was now confined in the Château d’If, that
impregnable fortress, ignorant of the future destiny of his father and
Mercédès; and all this because he had trusted to Villefort’s promise.
The thought was maddening, and Dantès threw himself furiously down on
his straw. The next morning at the same hour, the jailer came again.

“I do not offer you a million, because I have it not; but I will give
you a hundred crowns if, the first time you go to Marseilles, you will
seek out a young girl named Mercédès, at the Catalans, and give her two
lines from me.”

“Well,” said Dantès, “mark this; if you refuse at least to tell
Mercédès I am here, I will some day hide myself behind the door, and
when you enter I will dash out your brains with this stool.”

Villefort hastily quitted the apartment, but reflecting that the sight
of the deputy procureur running through the streets would be enough to
throw the whole city into confusion, he resumed his ordinary pace. At
his door he perceived a figure in the shadow that seemed to wait for
him. It was Mercédès, who, hearing no news of her lover, had come
unobserved to inquire after him.

As Villefort drew near, she advanced and stood before him. Dantès had
spoken of Mercédès, and Villefort instantly recognized her. Her beauty
and high bearing surprised him, and when she inquired what had become
of her lover, it seemed to him that she was the judge, and he the
accused.

“The young man you speak of,” said Villefort abruptly, “is a great
criminal, and I can do nothing for him, mademoiselle.” Mercédès burst
into tears, and, as Villefort strove to pass her, again addressed him.

As he thus reflected, he felt the sensation we have described, and
which had hitherto been unknown to him, arise in his bosom, and fill
him with vague apprehensions. It is thus that a wounded man trembles
instinctively at the approach of the finger to his wound until it be
healed, but Villefort’s was one of those that never close, or if they
do, only close to reopen more agonizing than ever. If at this moment
the sweet voice of Renée had sounded in his ears pleading for mercy, or
the fair Mercédès had entered and said, “In the name of God, I conjure
you to restore me my affianced husband,” his cold and trembling hands
would have signed his release; but no voice broke the stillness of the
chamber, and the door was opened only by Villefort’s valet, who came to
tell him that the travelling carriage was in readiness.

Meanwhile what of Mercédès? She had met Fernand at the corner of the
Rue de la Loge; she had returned to the Catalans, and had despairingly
cast herself on her couch. Fernand, kneeling by her side, took her
hand, and covered it with kisses that Mercédès did not even feel. She
passed the night thus. The lamp went out for want of oil, but she paid
no heed to the darkness, and dawn came, but she knew not that it was
day. Grief had made her blind to all but one object—that was Edmond.

Fernand understood nothing except that Dantès was absent. What had
become of him he cared not to inquire. Only, during the respite the
absence of his rival afforded him, he reflected, partly on the means of
deceiving Mercédès as to the cause of his absence, partly on plans of
emigration and abduction, as from time to time he sat sad and
motionless on the summit of Cape Pharo, at the spot from whence
Marseilles and the Catalans are visible, watching for the apparition of
a young and handsome man, who was for him also the messenger of
vengeance. Fernand’s mind was made up; he would shoot Dantès, and then
kill himself. But Fernand was mistaken; a man of his disposition never
kills himself, for he constantly hopes.

During this time the empire made its last conscription, and every man
in France capable of bearing arms rushed to obey the summons of the
emperor. Fernand departed with the rest, bearing with him the terrible
thought that while he was away, his rival would perhaps return and
marry Mercédès. Had Fernand really meant to kill himself, he would have
done so when he parted from Mercédès. His devotion, and the compassion
he showed for her misfortunes, produced the effect they always produce
on noble minds—Mercédès had always had a sincere regard for Fernand,
and this was now strengthened by gratitude.

“My brother,” said she, as she placed his knapsack on his shoulders,
“be careful of yourself, for if you are killed, I shall be alone in the
world.” These words carried a ray of hope into Fernand’s heart. Should
Dantès not return, Mercédès might one day be his.

Mercédès was left alone face to face with the vast plain that had never
seemed so barren, and the sea that had never seemed so vast. Bathed in
tears she wandered about the Catalan village. Sometimes she stood mute
and motionless as a statue, looking towards Marseilles, at other times
gazing on the sea, and debating as to whether it were not better to
cast herself into the abyss of the ocean, and thus end her woes. It was
not want of courage that prevented her putting this resolution into
execution; but her religious feelings came to her aid and saved her.

Caderousse was, like Fernand, enrolled in the army, but, being married
and eight years older, he was merely sent to the frontier. Old Dantès,
who was only sustained by hope, lost all hope at Napoleon’s downfall.
Five months after he had been separated from his son, and almost at the
hour of his arrest, he breathed his last in Mercédès’ arms. M. Morrel
paid the expenses of his funeral, and a few small debts the poor old
man had contracted.

“Then you will love me. If you are young, I will be your comrade; if
you are old, I will be your son. I have a father who is seventy if he
yet lives; I only love him and a young girl called Mercédès. My father
has not yet forgotten me, I am sure, but God alone knows if she loves
me still; I shall love you as I loved my father.”

“I do, indeed; and this I swear by the two beings most dear to me upon
earth,—my father and Mercédès.”

Dantès obeyed, and commenced what he called his history, but which
consisted only of the account of a voyage to India, and two or three
voyages to the Levant, until he arrived at the recital of his last
cruise, with the death of Captain Leclere, and the receipt of a packet
to be delivered by himself to the grand marshal; his interview with
that personage, and his receiving, in place of the packet brought, a
letter addressed to a Monsieur Noirtier—his arrival at Marseilles, and
interview with his father—his affection for Mercédès, and their nuptial
feast—his arrest and subsequent examination, his temporary detention at
the Palais de Justice, and his final imprisonment in the Château d’If.
From this point everything was a blank to Dantès—he knew nothing more,
not even the length of time he had been imprisoned. His recital
finished, the abbé reflected long and earnestly.

“Was there any person whose interest it was to prevent your marriage
with Mercédès?”

It was fourteen years, day for day, since Dantès’ arrest. He was
nineteen when he entered the Château d’If; he was thirty-three when he
escaped. A sorrowful smile passed over his face; he asked himself what
had become of Mercédès, who must believe him dead. Then his eyes
lighted up with hatred as he thought of the three men who had caused
him so long and wretched a captivity. He renewed against Danglars,
Fernand, and Villefort the oath of implacable vengeance he had made in
his dungeon.

The following day Dantès presented Jacopo with an entirely new vessel,
accompanying the gift by a donation of one hundred piastres, that he
might provide himself with a suitable crew and other requisites for his
outfit, upon condition that he would go at once to Marseilles for the
purpose of inquiring after an old man named Louis Dantès, residing in
the Allées de Meilhan, and also a young woman called Mercédès, an
inhabitant of the Catalan village.

A mournful answer awaited each of Edmond’s eager inquiries as to the
information Jacopo had obtained. Old Dantès was dead, and Mercédès had
disappeared.

Dantès listened to these melancholy tidings with outward calmness; but,
leaping lightly ashore, he signified his desire to be quite alone. In a
couple of hours he returned. Two of the men from Jacopo’s boat came on
board the yacht to assist in navigating it, and he gave orders that she
should be steered direct to Marseilles. For his father’s death he was
in some manner prepared; but he knew not how to account for the
mysterious disappearance of Mercédès.

“True,” said the abbé, with a stifled sigh, “Mercédès it was.”

“The name of Edmond’s betrothed was Mercédès.”

“Why, he was not altogether forsaken,” continued Caderousse, “for
Mercédès the Catalan and Monsieur Morrel were very kind to him; but
somehow the poor old man had contracted a profound hatred for
Fernand—the very person,” added Caderousse with a bitter smile, “that
you named just now as being one of Dantès’ faithful and attached
friends.”

“Why, did you not hear all we said?” inquired Caderousse. “It is a
beautiful diamond left by poor Edmond Dantès, to be sold, and the money
divided between his father, Mercédès, his betrothed bride, Fernand,
Danglars, and myself. The jewel is worth at least fifty thousand
francs.”

“The next day Mercédès came to implore the protection of M. de
Villefort; she did not obtain it, however, and went to visit the old
man; when she saw him so miserable and heart-broken, having passed a
sleepless night, and not touched food since the previous day, she
wished him to go with her that she might take care of him; but the old
man would not consent. ‘No,’ was the old man’s reply, ‘I will not leave
this house, for my poor dear boy loves me better than anything in the
world; and if he gets out of prison he will come and see me the first
thing, and what would he think if I did not wait here for him?’ I heard
all this from the window, for I was anxious that Mercédès should
persuade the old man to accompany her, for his footsteps over my head
night and day did not leave me a moment’s repose.”

“From day to day he lived on alone, and more and more solitary. M.
Morrel and Mercédès came to see him, but his door was closed; and,
although I was certain he was at home, he would not make any answer.
One day, when, contrary to his custom, he had admitted Mercédès, and
the poor girl, in spite of her own grief and despair, endeavored to
console him, he said to her,—‘Be assured, my dear daughter, he is dead;
and instead of expecting him, it is he who is awaiting us; I am quite
happy, for I am the oldest, and of course shall see him first.’

“For the first three days I heard him walking about as usual, but, on
the fourth I heard nothing. I then resolved to go up to him at all
risks. The door was closed, but I looked through the keyhole, and saw
him so pale and haggard, that believing him very ill, I went and told
M. Morrel and then ran on to Mercédès. They both came immediately, M.
Morrel bringing a doctor, and the doctor said it was inflammation of
the bowels, and ordered him a limited diet. I was there, too, and I
never shall forget the old man’s smile at this prescription.

“Mercédès came again, and she found him so altered that she was even
more anxious than before to have him taken to her own home. This was M.
Morrel’s wish also, who would fain have conveyed the old man against
his consent; but the old man resisted, and cried so that they were
actually frightened. Mercédès remained, therefore, by his bedside, and
M. Morrel went away, making a sign to the Catalan that he had left his
purse on the chimney-piece; but, availing himself of the doctor’s
order, the old man would not take any sustenance; at length (after nine
days of despair and fasting), the old man died, cursing those who had
caused his misery, and saying to Mercédès, ‘If you ever see my Edmond
again, tell him I die blessing him.’”

The abbé opened his mouth, hesitated for a moment, then, making an
effort at self-control, he said, “And Mercédès—they tell me that she
has disappeared?”

“Mercédès is at this moment one of the greatest ladies in Paris,”
replied Caderousse.

“Mercédès was at first in the deepest despair at the blow which
deprived her of Edmond. I have told you of her attempts to propitiate
M. de Villefort, her devotion to the elder Dantès. In the midst of her
despair, a new affliction overtook her. This was the departure of
Fernand—of Fernand, whose crime she did not know, and whom she regarded
as her brother. Fernand went, and Mercédès remained alone.

“Mercédès seized Fernand’s hands with a transport which he took for
love, but which was only joy at being no longer alone in the world, and
seeing at last a friend, after long hours of solitary sorrow. And then,
it must be confessed, Fernand had never been hated—he was only not
precisely loved. Another possessed all Mercédès’ heart; that other was
absent, had disappeared, perhaps was dead. At this last thought
Mercédès burst into a flood of tears, and wrung her hands in agony; but
the thought, which she had always repelled before when it was suggested
to her by another, came now in full force upon her mind; and then, too,
old Dantès incessantly said to her, ‘Our Edmond is dead; if he were
not, he would return to us.’

“The old man died, as I have told you; had he lived, Mercédès,
perchance, had not become the wife of another, for he would have been
there to reproach her infidelity. Fernand saw this, and when he learned
of the old man’s death he returned. He was now a lieutenant. At his
first coming he had not said a word of love to Mercédès; at the second
he reminded her that he loved her.

“Mercédès begged for six months more in which to await and mourn for
Edmond.”

“Well, Mercédès was married,” proceeded Caderousse; “but although in
the eyes of the world she appeared calm, she nearly fainted as she
passed La Réserve, where, eighteen months before, the betrothal had
been celebrated with him whom she might have known she still loved, had
she looked to the bottom of her heart. Fernand, more happy, but not
more at his ease—for I saw at this time he was in constant dread of
Edmond’s return—Fernand was very anxious to get his wife away, and to
depart himself. There were too many unpleasant possibilities associated
with the Catalans, and eight days after the wedding they left
Marseilles.”

“Did you ever see Mercédès again?” inquired the priest.

“Oh,” replied Caderousse, “did he know so little of his lovely
betrothed? Mercédès might have been a queen, sir, if the crown were to
be placed on the heads of the loveliest and most intelligent. Fernand’s
fortune was already waxing great, and she developed with his growing
fortune. She learned drawing, music—everything. Besides, I believe,
between ourselves, she did this in order to distract her mind, that she
might forget; and she only filled her head in order to alleviate the
weight on her heart. But now her position in life is assured,”
continued Caderousse; “no doubt fortune and honors have comforted her;
she is rich, a countess, and yet——”

“As I went away a purse fell at my feet—it contained five-and-twenty
louis; I raised my head quickly, and saw Mercédès, who at once shut the
blind.”

The count bowed again, but lower than before; he was even paler than
Mercédès.

And Mercédès raised her fine eyes to heaven with so fervent an
expression of gratitude, that the count fancied he saw tears in them.
M. de Morcerf approached her.

“Did your father speak of it?” inquired Mercédès eagerly.

“And what do you suppose is the count’s age?” inquired Mercédès,
evidently attaching great importance to this question.

“So young,—it is impossible,” said Mercédès, replying at the same time
to what Albert said as well as to her own private reflection.

The pretext of an opera engagement was so much the more feasible, as
there chanced to be on that very night a more than ordinary attraction
at the Académie Royale. Levasseur, who had been suffering under severe
illness, made his reappearance in the character of _Bertram_, and, as
usual, the announcement of the most admired production of the favorite
composer of the day had attracted a brilliant and fashionable audience.
Morcerf, like most other young men of rank and fortune, had his
orchestra stall, with the certainty of always finding a seat in at
least a dozen of the principal boxes occupied by persons of his
acquaintance; he had, moreover, his right of entry into the omnibus
box. Château-Renaud rented a stall beside his own, while Beauchamp, as
a journalist, had unlimited range all over the theatre. It happened
that on this particular night the minister’s box was placed at the
disposal of Lucien Debray, who offered it to the Comte de Morcerf, who
again, upon his rejection of it by Mercédès, sent it to Danglars, with
an intimation that he should probably do himself the honor of joining
the baroness and her daughter during the evening, in the event of their
accepting the box in question. The ladies received the offer with too
much pleasure to dream of a refusal. To no class of persons is the
presentation of a gratuitous opera-box more acceptable than to the
wealthy millionaire, who still hugs economy while boasting of carrying
a king’s ransom in his waistcoat pocket.

At the time the Countess of Morcerf returned to the rooms, after giving
her orders, many guests were arriving, more attracted by the charming
hospitality of the countess than by the distinguished position of the
count; for, owing to the good taste of Mercédès, one was sure of
finding some devices at her entertainment worthy of describing, or even
copying in case of need.

And the two carriages passed on towards their different destinations.
Madame Danglars therefore came, not only beautiful in person, but
radiant with splendor; she entered by one door at the time when
Mercédès appeared at the door. The countess took Albert to meet Madame
Danglars. He approached, paid her some well merited compliments on her
toilet, and offered his arm to conduct her to a seat. Albert looked
around him.

“But your house is not M. de Morcerf’s,” murmured Mercédès; “and since
he has been here I have watched him.”

“Just to please me, Albert,” said Mercédès. Albert kissed his mother’s
hand, and drew near the count. Another salver passed, loaded like the
preceding ones; she saw Albert attempt to persuade the count, but he
obstinately refused. Albert rejoined his mother; she was very pale.

“In a word,” said Mercédès, “it was a way of assuring me that his
abstinence was intended.”

A minute afterwards the blinds were thrown open, and through the
jessamine and clematis that overhung the window one could see the
garden ornamented with lanterns, and the supper laid under the tent.
Dancers, players, talkers, all uttered an exclamation of joy—everyone
inhaled with delight the breeze that floated in. At the same time
Mercédès reappeared, paler than before, but with that imperturbable
expression of countenance which she sometimes wore. She went straight
to the group of which her husband formed the centre.

“Then,” said Mercédès, “I will lead the way.”

The count almost staggered at these simple words; then he fixed his
eyes on Mercédès. It was only a momentary glance, but it seemed to the
countess to have lasted for a century, so much was expressed in that
one look. He offered his arm to the countess; she took it, or rather
just touched it with her little hand, and they together descended the
steps, lined with rhododendrons and camellias. Behind them, by another
outlet, a group of about twenty persons rushed into the garden with
loud exclamations of delight.

“Yes, madame; and it was an excellent idea of yours to open the doors
and the blinds.” As he ceased speaking, the count felt the hand of
Mercédès tremble. “But you,” he said, “with that light dress, and
without anything to cover you but that gauze scarf, perhaps you feel
cold?”

The count looked at Mercédès as if to interrogate her, but she
continued to walk on in silence, and he refrained from speaking. They
reached the building, ornamented with magnificent fruits, which ripen
at the beginning of July in the artificial temperature which takes the
place of the sun, so frequently absent in our climate. The countess
left the arm of Monte Cristo, and gathered a bunch of Muscatel grapes.

“Do you refuse?” said Mercédès, in a tremulous voice.

Mercédès let them fall, and sighed. A magnificent peach was hanging
against an adjoining wall, ripened by the same artificial heat.
Mercédès drew near, and plucked the fruit.

“Count,” added Mercédès with a supplicating glance, “there is a
beautiful Arabian custom, which makes eternal friends of those who have
together eaten bread and salt under the same roof.”

The answer was so little like the one Mercédès desired, that she turned
away to give vent to a sigh, which sounded more like a groan. “Thank
you,” she said. And they walked on again. They went the whole length of
the garden without uttering a word.

“At their ball; it was apparent enough. Why, did not the countess, the
proud Mercédès, the disdainful Catalane, who will scarcely open her
lips to her oldest acquaintances, take your arm, lead you into the
garden, into the private walks, and remain there for half an hour?”

The sight of Albert produced the effect which might naturally be
expected on Mercédès; she pressed her son’s hand and sobbed aloud, but
her tears relieved her. Albert stood one moment speechless by the side
of his mother’s bed. It was evident from his pale face and knit brows
that his resolution to revenge himself was growing weaker.

Mercédès started; she noticed that the young man did not say “my
father.”

Mercédès raised herself on her feverish arm.

“Do you say M. de Monte Cristo is our enemy?” replied Mercédès,
becoming paler than the sheet which covered her. “Who told you so? Why,
you are mad, Albert! M. de Monte Cristo has only shown us kindness. M.
de Monte Cristo saved your life; you yourself presented him to us. Oh,
I entreat you, my son, if you had entertained such an idea, dispel it;
and my counsel to you—nay, my prayer—is to retain his friendship.”

“I?” said Mercédès, blushing as rapidly as she had turned pale, and
again becoming paler than ever.

Mercédès shuddered, and, fixing on her son a scrutinizing gaze, “You
speak strangely,” said she to Albert, “and you appear to have some
singular prejudices. What has the count done? Three days since you were
with him in Normandy; only three days since we looked on him as our
best friend.”

An ironical smile passed over Albert’s lips. Mercédès saw it and with
the double instinct of woman and mother guessed all; but as she was
prudent and strong-minded she concealed both her sorrows and her fears.
Albert was silent; an instant after, the countess resumed:

“Well,” replied Mercédès, sighing, “go, Albert; I will not make you a
slave to your filial piety.”

Albert pretended he did not hear, bowed to his mother, and quitted her.
Scarcely had he shut her door, when Mercédès called a confidential
servant, and ordered him to follow Albert wherever he should go that
evening, and to come and tell her immediately what he observed. Then
she rang for her lady’s maid, and, weak as she was, she dressed, in
order to be ready for whatever might happen. The footman’s mission was
an easy one. Albert went to his room, and dressed with unusual care. At
ten minutes to eight Beauchamp arrived; he had seen Château-Renaud, who
had promised to be in the orchestra before the curtain was raised. Both
got into Albert’s _coupé_; and, as the young man had no reason to
conceal where he was going, he called aloud, “To the Opera.” In his
impatience he arrived before the beginning of the performance.

“Yours!” cried she, throwing back her veil,—“yours, which I alone,
perhaps, have not forgotten. Edmond, it is not Madame de Morcerf who is
come to you, it is Mercédès.”

“Mercédès is dead, madame,” said Monte Cristo; “I know no one now of
that name.”

“Mercédès lives, sir, and she remembers, for she alone recognized you
when she saw you, and even before she saw you, by your voice,
Edmond,—by the simple sound of your voice; and from that moment she has
followed your steps, watched you, feared you, and she needs not to
inquire what hand has dealt the blow which now strikes M. de Morcerf.”

“Fernand, do you mean?” replied Monte Cristo, with bitter irony; “since
we are recalling names, let us remember them all.” Monte Cristo had
pronounced the name of Fernand with such an expression of hatred that
Mercédès felt a thrill of horror run through every vein.

“And why do you represent Providence?” cried Mercédès. “Why do you
remember when it forgets? What are Yanina and its vizier to you,
Edmond? What injury has Fernand Mondego done you in betraying Ali
Tepelini?”

“Ah, madame,” replied Monte Cristo, “all this is an affair between the
French captain and the daughter of Vasiliki. It does not concern me,
you are right; and if I have sworn to revenge myself, it is not on the
French captain, or the Count of Morcerf, but on the fisherman Fernand,
the husband of Mercédès the Catalane.”

“I do not know,” said Mercédès.

Monte Cristo went to a secretaire, opened a drawer by a spring, from
which he took a paper which had lost its original color, and the ink of
which had become of a rusty hue—this he placed in the hands of
Mercédès. It was Danglars’ letter to the king’s attorney, which the
Count of Monte Cristo, disguised as a clerk from the house of Thomson &
French, had taken from the file against Edmond Dantès, on the day he
had paid the two hundred thousand francs to M. de Boville. Mercédès
read with terror the following lines:

“How dreadful!” said Mercédès, passing her hand across her brow, moist
with perspiration; “and that letter——”

“Can it be?” cried Mercédès, shuddering.

“That is what I heard on leaving my prison fourteen years after I had
entered it; and that is why, on account of the living Mercédès and my
deceased father, I have sworn to revenge myself on Fernand, and—I have
revenged myself.”

“Edmond,” said the poor mother, who tried every means, “when I call you
Edmond, why do you not call me Mercédès?”

“Mercédès!” repeated Monte Cristo; “Mercédès! Well yes, you are right;
that name has still its charms, and this is the first time for a long
period that I have pronounced it so distinctly. Oh, Mercédès, I have
uttered your name with the sigh of melancholy, with the groan of
sorrow, with the last effort of despair; I have uttered it when frozen
with cold, crouched on the straw in my dungeon; I have uttered it,
consumed with heat, rolling on the stone floor of my prison. Mercédès,
I must revenge myself, for I suffered fourteen years,—fourteen years I
wept, I cursed; now I tell you, Mercédès, I must revenge myself.”

“Edmond,” continued Mercédès, with her arms extended towards the count,
“since I first knew you, I have adored your name, have respected your
memory. Edmond, my friend, do not compel me to tarnish that noble and
pure image reflected incessantly on the mirror of my heart. Edmond, if
you knew all the prayers I have addressed to God for you while I
thought you were living and since I have thought you must be dead! Yes,
dead, alas! I imagined your dead body buried at the foot of some gloomy
tower, or cast to the bottom of a pit by hateful jailers, and I wept!
What could I do for you, Edmond, besides pray and weep? Listen; for ten
years I dreamed each night the same dream. I had been told that you had
endeavored to escape; that you had taken the place of another prisoner;
that you had slipped into the winding sheet of a dead body; that you
had been thrown alive from the top of the Château d’If, and that the
cry you uttered as you dashed upon the rocks first revealed to your
jailers that they were your murderers. Well, Edmond, I swear to you, by
the head of that son for whom I entreat your pity,—Edmond, for ten
years I saw every night every detail of that frightful tragedy, and for
ten years I heard every night the cry which awoke me, shuddering and
cold. And I, too, Edmond—oh! believe me—guilty as I was—oh, yes, I,
too, have suffered much!”

“No,” interrupted Mercédès, “but I have seen him whom I loved on the
point of murdering my son.”

Mercédès uttered these words with such deep anguish, with an accent of
such intense despair, that Monte Cristo could not restrain a sob. The
lion was daunted; the avenger was conquered.

Mercédès uttered a cry which made the tears start from Monte Cristo’s
eyes; but these tears disappeared almost instantaneously, for,
doubtless, God had sent some angel to collect them—far more precious
were they in his eyes than the richest pearls of Guzerat and Ophir.

“I say, since you command me, Mercédès, I must die.”

“You do not suppose that, publicly outraged in the face of a whole
theatre, in the presence of your friends and those of your
son—challenged by a boy who will glory in my forgiveness as if it were
a victory—you do not suppose that I can for one moment wish to live.
What I most loved after you, Mercédès, was myself, my dignity, and that
strength which rendered me superior to other men; that strength was my
life. With one word you have crushed it, and I die.”

Mercédès shrieked, and sprang towards Monte Cristo, but, suddenly
stopping, “Edmond,” said she, “there is a God above us, since you live
and since I have seen you again; I trust to him from my heart. While
waiting his assistance I trust to your word; you have said that my son
should live, have you not?”

“Yes, madame, he shall live,” said Monte Cristo, surprised that without
more emotion Mercédès had accepted the heroic sacrifice he made for
her. Mercédès extended her hand to the count.

“Edmond,” said she, and her eyes were wet with tears while looking at
him to whom she spoke, “how noble it is of you, how great the action
you have just performed, how sublime to have taken pity on a poor woman
who appealed to you with every chance against her, Alas, I am grown old
with grief more than with years, and cannot now remind my Edmond by a
smile, or by a look, of that Mercédès whom he once spent so many hours
in contemplating. Ah, believe me, Edmond, as I told you, I too have
suffered much; I repeat, it is melancholy to pass one’s life without
having one joy to recall, without preserving a single hope; but that
proves that all is not yet over. No, it is not finished; I feel it by
what remains in my heart. Oh, I repeat it, Edmond; what you have just
done is beautiful—it is grand; it is sublime.”

“Do you say so now, Mercédès?—then what would you say if you knew the
extent of the sacrifice I make to you? Suppose that the Supreme Being,
after having created the world and fertilized chaos, had paused in the
work to spare an angel the tears that might one day flow for mortal
sins from her immortal eyes; suppose that when everything was in
readiness and the moment had come for God to look upon his work and see
that it was good—suppose he had snuffed out the sun and tossed the
world back into eternal night—then—even then, Mercédès, you could not
imagine what I lose in sacrificing my life at this moment.”

Mercédès looked at the count in a way which expressed at the same time
her astonishment, her admiration, and her gratitude. Monte Cristo
pressed his forehead on his burning hands, as if his brain could no
longer bear alone the weight of its thoughts.

“Edmond,” said Mercédès, “I have but one word more to say to you.”

“Edmond,” continued she, “you will see that if my face is pale, if my
eyes are dull, if my beauty is gone; if Mercédès, in short, no longer
resembles her former self in her features, you will see that her heart
is still the same. Adieu, then, Edmond; I have nothing more to ask of
heaven—I have seen you again, and have found you as noble and as great
as formerly you were. Adieu, Edmond, adieu, and thank you.”

But the count did not answer. Mercédès opened the door of the study and
had disappeared before he had recovered from the painful and profound
reverie into which his thwarted vengeance had plunged him.

After Mercédès had left Monte Cristo, he fell into profound gloom.
Around him and within him the flight of thought seemed to have stopped;
his energetic mind slumbered, as the body does after extreme fatigue.

“Yet,” continued the count, becoming each moment more absorbed in the
anticipation of the dreadful sacrifice for the morrow, which Mercédès
had accepted, “yet, it is impossible that so noble-minded a woman
should thus through selfishness consent to my death when I am in the
prime of life and strength; it is impossible that she can carry to such
a point maternal love, or rather delirium. There are virtues which
become crimes by exaggeration. No, she must have conceived some
pathetic scene; she will come and throw herself between us; and what
would be sublime here will there appear ridiculous.”

By thus exaggerating to his own mind the anticipated ill-fortune of the
next day, to which he had condemned himself by promising Mercédès to
spare her son, the count at last exclaimed:

“Well, we have time; look.” Monte Cristo took the pistols he held in
his hand when Mercédès entered, and fixing an ace of clubs against the
iron plate, with four shots he successively shot off the four sides of
the club. At each shot Morrel turned pale. He examined the bullets with
which Monte Cristo performed this dexterous feat, and saw that they
were no larger than buckshot.

Had a thunderbolt fallen in the midst of the spectators of this
unexpected scene, it would not have surprised them more than did
Albert’s declaration. As for Monte Cristo, his eyes slowly rose towards
heaven with an expression of infinite gratitude. He could not
understand how Albert’s fiery nature, of which he had seen so much
among the Roman bandits, had suddenly stooped to this humiliation. He
recognized the influence of Mercédès, and saw why her noble heart had
not opposed the sacrifice she knew beforehand would be useless.

As if the same idea had animated these two beings, Mercédès was doing
the same in her apartments that he had just done in his. Everything was
in order,—laces, dresses, jewels, linen, money, all were arranged in
the drawers, and the countess was carefully collecting the keys. Albert
saw all these preparations and understood them, and exclaiming, “My
mother!” he threw his arms around her neck.

“I also,” replied Mercédès, “am going, and I acknowledge I had depended
on your accompanying me; have I deceived myself?”

“Albert, my child,” said Mercédès, “if I had a stronger heart, that is
the counsel I would have given you; your conscience has spoken when my
voice became too weak; listen to its dictates. You had friends, Albert;
break off their acquaintance. But do not despair; you have life before
you, my dear Albert, for you are yet scarcely twenty-two years old; and
as a pure heart like yours wants a spotless name, take my father’s—it
was Herrera. I am sure, my dear Albert, whatever may be your career,
you will soon render that name illustrious. Then, my son, return to the
world still more brilliant because of your former sorrows; and if I am
wrong, still let me cherish these hopes, for I have no future to look
forward to. For me the grave opens when I pass the threshold of this
house.”

“I am ready, my son,” said Mercédès.

He returned to Mercédès with tears in his eyes and heaving breast, and
without uttering a word he gave her the letter. Mercédès read:

Albert stood pale and motionless to hear what his mother would decide
after she had finished reading this letter. Mercédès turned her eyes
with an ineffable look towards heaven.

Monte Cristo was beginning to think, what he had not for a long time
dared to believe, that there were two Mercédès in the world, and he
might yet be happy. His eye, elate with happiness, was reading eagerly
the tearful gaze of Haydée, when suddenly the door opened. The count
knit his brow.

We must explain this visit, which although expected by Monte Cristo, is
unexpected to our readers. While Mercédès, as we have said, was making
a similar inventory of her property to Albert’s, while she was
arranging her jewels, shutting her drawers, collecting her keys, to
leave everything in perfect order, she did not perceive a pale and
sinister face at a glass door which threw light into the passage, from
which everything could be both seen and heard. He who was thus looking,
without being heard or seen, probably heard and saw all that passed in
Madame de Morcerf’s apartments. From that glass door the pale-faced man
went to the count’s bedroom and raised with a constricted hand the
curtain of a window overlooking the courtyard. He remained there ten
minutes, motionless and dumb, listening to the beating of his own
heart. For him those ten minutes were very long. It was then Albert,
returning from his meeting with the count, perceived his father
watching for his arrival behind a curtain, and turned aside. The
count’s eye expanded; he knew Albert had insulted the count dreadfully,
and that in every country in the world such an insult would lead to a
deadly duel. Albert returned safely—then the count was revenged.

“Fernand,” cried he, “of my hundred names I need only tell you one, to
overwhelm you! But you guess it now, do you not?—or, rather, you
remember it? For, notwithstanding all my sorrows and my tortures, I
show you today a face which the happiness of revenge makes young
again—a face you must often have seen in your dreams since your
marriage with Mercédès, my betrothed!”

Two persons were coming down the stairs; he had only time to creep into
an alcove to avoid them. It was Mercédès leaning on her son’s arm and
leaving the house. They passed close by the unhappy being, who,
concealed behind the damask curtain, almost felt Mercédès dress brush
past him, and his son’s warm breath, pronouncing these words:

The words died away, the steps were lost in the distance. The general
drew himself up, clinging to the curtain; he uttered the most dreadful
sob which ever escaped from the bosom of a father abandoned at the same
time by his wife and son. He soon heard the clatter of the iron step of
the hackney-coach, then the coachman’s voice, and then the rolling of
the heavy vehicle shook the windows. He darted to his bedroom to see
once more all he had loved in the world; but the hackney-coach drove on
and the head of neither Mercédès nor her son appeared at the window to
take a last look at the house or the deserted father and husband.

Since then the maid had been below, and like everyone else she thought
the young ladies were in their own room; Madame Danglars, therefore,
went to bed without a shadow of suspicion, and began to muse over the
recent events. In proportion as her memory became clearer, the
occurrences of the evening were revealed in their true light; what she
had taken for confusion was a tumult; what she had regarded as
something distressing, was in reality a disgrace. And then the baroness
remembered that she had felt no pity for poor Mercédès, who had been
afflicted with as severe a blow through her husband and son.

Mercédès and Albert were in that room.

Mercédès was much changed within the last few days; not that even in
her days of fortune she had ever dressed with the magnificent display
which makes us no longer able to recognize a woman when she appears in
a plain and simple attire; nor indeed, had she fallen into that state
of depression where it is impossible to conceal the garb of misery; no,
the change in Mercédès was that her eye no longer sparkled, her lips no
longer smiled, and there was now a hesitation in uttering the words
which formerly sprang so fluently from her ready wit.

It was not poverty which had broken her spirit; it was not a want of
courage which rendered her poverty burdensome. Mercédès, although
deposed from the exalted position she had occupied, lost in the sphere
she had now chosen, like a person passing from a room splendidly
lighted into utter darkness, appeared like a queen, fallen from her
palace to a hovel, and who, reduced to strict necessity, could neither
become reconciled to the earthen vessels she was herself forced to
place upon the table, nor to the humble pallet which had become her
bed.

Mercédès had never known misery; she had often, in her youth, spoken of
poverty, but between want and necessity, those synonymous words, there
is a wide difference.

Amongst the Catalans, Mercédès wished for a thousand things, but still
she never really wanted any. So long as the nets were good, they caught
fish; and so long as they sold their fish, they were able to buy twine
for new nets. And then, shut out from friendship, having but one
affection, which could not be mixed up with her ordinary pursuits, she
thought of herself—of no one but herself. Upon the little she earned
she lived as well as she could; now there were two to be supported, and
nothing to live upon.

Winter approached. Mercédès had no fire in that cold and naked
room—she, who was accustomed to stoves which heated the house from the
hall to the boudoir; she had not even one little flower—she whose
apartment had been a conservatory of costly exotics. But she had her
son. Hitherto the excitement of fulfilling a duty had sustained them.
Excitement, like enthusiasm, sometimes renders us unconscious to the
things of earth. But the excitement had calmed down, and they felt
themselves obliged to descend from dreams to reality; after having
exhausted the ideal, they found they must talk of the actual.

“Capital—nothing!” replied Mercédès with a mournful smile.

“You say this, my dear boy; but do you think we ought to accept these
3,000 francs?” said Mercédès, coloring.

“What is this?” asked Mercédès.

“Dear child!” said Mercédès, endeavoring in vain to restrain a tear
which glistened in the corner of her eye. “Indeed, you only wanted
misfortune to change my love for you to admiration. I am not unhappy
while I possess my son!”

“Yes; it is decided that you are to live at Marseilles, and that I am
to leave for Africa, where I will earn for myself the right to use the
name I now bear, instead of the one I have thrown aside.” Mercédès
sighed. “Well, mother, I yesterday engaged myself as substitute in the
Spahis,”25 added the young man, lowering his eyes with a certain
feeling of shame, for even he was unconscious of the sublimity of his
self-abasement. “I thought my body was my own, and that I might sell
it. I yesterday took the place of another. I sold myself for more than
I thought I was worth,” he added, attempting to smile; “I fetched 2,000
francs.”

“Then these 1,000 francs——” said Mercédès, shuddering.

Mercédès raised her eyes to heaven with an expression it would be
impossible to describe, and tears, which had hitherto been restrained,
now yielded to her emotion, and ran down her cheeks.

Mercédès sighed while endeavoring to smile; the devoted mother felt
that she ought not to allow the whole weight of the sacrifice to fall
upon her son.

“Do you think so?” said Mercédès.

“It is well,” replied Mercédès, with her eloquent glance; “you are
right, my love; let us prove to those who are watching our actions that
we are worthy of compassion.”

“Well, be it so—let us part,” said Mercédès, folding around her
shoulders the only shawl she had taken away, and which accidentally
happened to be a valuable black cashmere. Albert gathered up his papers
hastily, rang the bell to pay the thirty francs he owed to the
landlord, and offering his arm to his mother, they descended the
stairs.

“Mother,” he said, turning towards Mercédès, “this is M. Debray,
secretary of the Minister for the Interior, once a friend of mine.”

A man was hidden in Lafitte’s banking-house, behind one of the little
arched windows which are placed above each desk; he saw Mercédès enter
the diligence, and he also saw Albert withdraw. Then he passed his hand
across his forehead, which was clouded with doubt.

It yet stood, under the shade of the fine avenue of lime-trees, which
forms one of the most frequent walks of the idlers of Marseilles,
covered by an immense vine, which spreads its aged and blackened
branches over the stone front, burnt yellow by the ardent sun of the
south. Two stone steps worn away by the friction of many feet led to
the door, which was made of three planks; the door had never been
painted or varnished, so great cracks yawned in it during the dry
season to close again when the rains came on. The house, with all its
crumbling antiquity and apparent misery, was yet cheerful and
picturesque, and was the same that old Dantès formerly inhabited—the
only difference being that the old man occupied merely the garret,
while the whole house was now placed at the command of Mercédès by the
count.

The woman whom the count had seen leave the ship with so much regret
entered this house; she had scarcely closed the door after her when
Monte Cristo appeared at the corner of a street, so that he found and
lost her again almost at the same instant. The worn out steps were old
acquaintances of his; he knew better than anyone else how to open that
weather-beaten door with the large headed nail which served to raise
the latch within. He entered without knocking, or giving any other
intimation of his presence, as if he had been a friend or the master of
the place. At the end of a passage paved with bricks, was a little
garden, bathed in sunshine, and rich in warmth and light. In this
garden Mercédès had found, at the place indicated by the count, the sum
of money which he, through a sense of delicacy, had described as having
been placed there twenty-four years previously. The trees of the garden
were easily seen from the steps of the street-door.

Monte Cristo, on stepping into the house, heard a sigh that was almost
a deep sob; he looked in the direction whence it came, and there under
an arbor of Virginia jessamine,29 with its thick foliage and beautiful
long purple flowers, he saw Mercédès seated, with her head bowed, and
weeping bitterly. She had raised her veil, and with her face hidden by
her hands was giving free scope to the sighs and tears which had been
so long restrained by the presence of her son.

Monte Cristo advanced a few steps, which were heard on the gravel.
Mercédès raised her head, and uttered a cry of terror on beholding a
man before her.

“I am, indeed, most wretched,” replied Mercédès. “Alone in the world, I
had but my son, and he has left me!”

The count looked up and fixed his eyes on Mercédès, who arose partly
from her seat and extended both her hands towards him.

Mercédès burst into tears; her woman’s heart was breaking under its
load of memories. Monte Cristo took her hand and imprinted a kiss on
it; but she herself felt that it was a kiss of no greater warmth than
he would have bestowed on the hand of some marble statue of a saint.

“No, Mercédès,” said Monte Cristo, “no; you judge yourself with too
much severity. You are a noble-minded woman, and it was your grief that
disarmed me. Still I was but an agent, led on by an invisible and
offended Deity, who chose not to withhold the fatal blow that I was
destined to hurl. I take that God to witness, at whose feet I have
prostrated myself daily for the last ten years, that I would have
sacrificed my life to you, and with my life the projects that were
indissolubly linked with it. But—and I say it with some pride,
Mercédès—God needed me, and I lived. Examine the past and the present,
and endeavor to dive into futurity, and then say whether I am not a
divine instrument. The most dreadful misfortunes, the most frightful
sufferings, the abandonment of all those who loved me, the persecution
of those who did not know me, formed the trials of my youth; when
suddenly, from captivity, solitude, misery, I was restored to light and
liberty, and became the possessor of a fortune so brilliant, so
unbounded, so unheard-of, that I must have been blind not to be
conscious that God had endowed me with it to work out his own great
designs. From that time I looked upon this fortune as something
confided to me for a particular purpose. Not a thought was given to a
life which you once, Mercédès, had the power to render blissful; not
one hour of peaceful calm was mine; but I felt myself driven on like an
exterminating angel. Like adventurous captains about to embark on some
enterprise full of danger, I laid in my provisions, I loaded my
weapons, I collected every means of attack and defence; I inured my
body to the most violent exercises, my soul to the bitterest trials; I
taught my arm to slay, my eyes to behold excruciating sufferings, and
my mouth to smile at the most horrid spectacles. Good-natured,
confiding, and forgiving as I had been, I became revengeful, cunning,
and wicked, or rather, immovable as fate. Then I launched out into the
path that was opened to me. I overcame every obstacle, and reached the
goal; but woe to those who stood in my pathway!”

“Enough,” said Mercédès; “enough, Edmond! Believe me, that she who
alone recognized you has been the only one to comprehend you; and had
she crossed your path, and you had crushed her like glass, still,
Edmond, still she must have admired you! Like the gulf between me and
the past, there is an abyss between you, Edmond, and the rest of
mankind; and I tell you freely that the comparison I draw between you
and other men will ever be one of my greatest tortures. No, there is
nothing in the world to resemble you in worth and goodness! But we must
say farewell, Edmond, and let us part.”

“Before I leave you, Mercédès, have you no request to make?” said the
count.

“But have you no request to make for yourself, Mercédès?”

“Your son shall be happy, Mercédès,” repeated the count.

“To say that I shall live here, like the Mercédès of other times,
gaining my bread by labor, would not be true, nor would you believe me.
I have no longer the strength to do anything but to spend my days in
prayer. However, I shall have no occasion to work, for the little sum
of money buried by you, and which I found in the place you mentioned,
will be sufficient to maintain me. Rumor will probably be busy
respecting me, my occupations, my manner of living—that will signify
but little, that concerns God, you, and myself.”

“Mercédès,” said the count, “I do not say it to blame you, but you made
an unnecessary sacrifice in relinquishing the whole of the fortune
amassed by M. de Morcerf; half of it at least by right belonged to you,
in virtue of your vigilance and economy.”

“Alas!” exclaimed Mercédès, “if it were so, if I possessed free-will,
but without the power to render that will efficacious, it would drive
me to despair.”

“On the contrary, we shall meet again,” said Mercédès, pointing to
heaven with solemnity. “I tell you so to prove to you that I still
hope.”

And after pressing her own trembling hand upon that of the count,
Mercédès rushed up the stairs and disappeared. Monte Cristo slowly left
the house and turned towards the quay. But Mercédès did not witness his
departure, although she was seated at the little window of the room
which had been occupied by old Dantès. Her eyes were straining to see
the ship which was carrying her son over the vast sea; but still her
voice involuntarily murmured softly:

The count departed with a sad heart from the house in which he had left
Mercédès, probably never to behold her again. Since the death of little
Edward a great change had taken place in Monte Cristo. Having reached
the summit of his vengeance by a long and tortuous path, he saw an
abyss of doubt yawning before him. More than this, the conversation
which had just taken place between Mercédès and himself had awakened so
many recollections in his heart that he felt it necessary to combat
with them. A man of the count’s temperament could not long indulge in
that melancholy which can exist in common minds, but which destroys
superior ones. He thought he must have made an error in his
calculations if he now found cause to blame himself.

“Yes,” he said, “there is the stone upon which I used to sit; there is
the impression made by my shoulders on the wall; there is the mark of
my blood made when one day I dashed my head against the wall. Oh, those
figures, how well I remember them! I made them one day to calculate the
age of my father, that I might know whether I should find him still
living, and that of Mercédès, to know if I should find her still free.
After finishing that calculation, I had a minute’s hope. I did not
reckon upon hunger and infidelity!” and a bitter laugh escaped the
count.

He saw in fancy the burial of his father, and the marriage of Mercédès.
On the other side of the dungeon he perceived an inscription, the white
letters of which were still visible on the green wall: