I.      The Shark
         II.      The Three Documents
        III.      The Captain's Children
         IV.      Lady Glenarvan's Proposal
          V.      The Departure of the Duncan
         VI.      An Unexpected Passenger
        VII.      Jacques Paganel is Undeceived
       VIII.      The Geographer's Resolution
         IX.      Through the Strait of Magellan
          X.      The Course Decided
         XI.      Traveling in Chili
        XII.      Eleven Thousand Feet Aloft
       XIII.      A Sudden Descent
        XIV.      Providentially Rescued
         XV.      Thalcave
        XVI.      News of the Lost Captain
       XVII.      A Serious Necessity
      XVIII.      In Search of Water
        XIX.      The Red Wolves
         XX.      Strange Signs
        XXI.      A False Trail
       XXII.      The Flood
      XXIII.      A Singular Abode
       XXIV.      Paganel's Disclosure
        XXV.      Between Fire and Water
       XXVI.      The Return on Board
      XXVII.      A New Destination
     XXVIII.      Tristan d'Acunha and the Isle of Amsterdam
       XXIX.      The Storm on the Indian Ocean
        XXX.      A Hospitable Colonist
       XXXI.      The Quartermaster of the Britannia
      XXXII.      Preparations for the Journey
     XXXIII.      An Accident
      XXXIV.      Australian Explorers
       XXXV.      Crime or Calamity?
      XXXVI.      Fresh Faces
     XXXVII.      A Warning
    XXXVIII.      Wealth in the Wilderness
      XXXIX.      Suspicious Occurrences
         XL.      A Startling Discovery
        XLI.      The Plot Unveiled
       XLII.      Four Days of Anguish
      XLIII.      Helpless and Hopeless
       XLIV.      A Rough Captain
        XLV.      The Wreck of the Macquarie
       XLVI.      Vain Efforts
      XLVII.      A Dreaded Country
     XLVIII.      Introduction to the Cannibals
       XLIX.      A Momentous Interview
          L.      The Chief's Funeral
         LI.      Strangely Liberated
        LII.      The Sacred Mountain
       LIII.      A Bold Stratagem
        LIV.      From Peril to Safety
         LV.      Why the Duncan went to New Zealand
        LVI.      Ayrton's Obstinacy
       LVII.      A Discouraging Confession
      LVIII.      A Cry in the Night
        LIX.      Captain Grant's Story
         LX.      Paganel's Last Entanglement

On the 26th of July, 1864, under a strong gale from the northeast, a
magnificent yacht was steaming at full speed through the waves of the
North Channel. The flag of England fluttered at her yard-arm, while at
the top of the mainmast floated a blue pennon, bearing the initials
E. G., worked in gold and surmounted by a ducal coronet. The yacht
was called the Duncan, and belonged to Lord Glenarvan, one of the
sixteen Scottish peers sitting in the House of Lords, and also a most
distinguished member of the "Royal Thames Yacht Club," so celebrated
throughout the United Kingdom.

Lord Edward Glenarvan was on board with his young wife, Lady Helena,
and one of his cousins, Major MacNabb. The Duncan, newly constructed,
had just been making a trial voyage several miles beyond the Frith of
Clyde, and was now on her return to Glasgow. Already Arran Island was
appearing on the horizon, when the look-out signaled an enormous fish
that was sporting in the wake of the yacht. The captain, John Mangles,
at once informed Lord Glenarvan of the fact, who mounted on deck with
Major MacNabb, and asked the captain what he thought of the animal.

"A shark in these regions!" exclaimed Glenarvan.

"What do you think, MacNabb?" said Lord Glenarvan to the major; "are
you of a mind to try the adventure?"

"Very well, captain," said Lord Glenarvan. He then summoned Lady
Helena, who joined him on deck, tempted by the exciting sport.

Lady Glenarvan, not wishing to witness this strange "exploration,"
retired to the cabin. The shark was still panting. He was ten feet
long, and weighed more than six hundred pounds. These dimensions are
nothing extraordinary; for if the balance-fish is not classed among the
giants of this species, at least he belongs to the most formidable of
their family.

[Illustration: "Good," said Glenarvan; "wash the dirty thing, and bring
it into the cabin."]

"What!" exclaimed Lord Glenarvan, "is it a bottle that this shark has
in his stomach?"

"Well, Tom," said Glenarvan, "draw it out carefully. Bottles found in
the sea frequently contain precious documents."

"We shall see," said Glenarvan. "Well, Tom?"

"Good," said Glenarvan; "wash the dirty thing, and bring it into the
cabin."

Tom obeyed; and the bottle found under such singular circumstances was
placed on the cabin-table, around which Lord Glenarvan, Major MacNabb,
and Captain John Mangles took their seats, together with Lady Helena;
for a woman, they say, is always a little inquisitive.

However, they must know what it was, and Glenarvan, without waiting
longer, proceeded to examine the bottle. He took, moreover, all
necessary precautions. You would have thought a coroner was pointing
out the particulars of a suspicious quest. And Glenarvan was right,
for the most insignificant mark in appearance may often lead to an
important discovery.

"We shall know, my dear," said Lord Edward, "and already we can affirm
that it has come from a distance. See the petrified particles that
cover it, these substances mineralized, so to speak, under the action
of the sea-water. This waif had already taken a long voyage in the
ocean, before being engulfed in the stomach of a shark."

"But whence does it come?" inquired Lady Glenarvan.

And so saying, Glenarvan began to scrape off the hard particles that
protected the neck. Soon the cork appeared, but very much damaged with
the salt water.

"This is a pity," said Glenarvan; "for if there is any paper in it, it
will be in a bad condition."

"I will add," continued Glenarvan, "that this badly-corked bottle would
soon have sunk; and it is fortunate that this shark swallowed it, and
brought it on board of the Duncan."

"We shall soon see," answered Glenarvan. At the same time he drew out
the cork with the greatest care, and a strong saline odor permeated the
cabin.

"Yes," said Glenarvan; "I am not mistaken! Here are papers!"

"Only," replied Glenarvan, "they appear to be damaged by the water.
It is impossible to remove them, for they adhere to the sides of the
bottle."

"I would rather keep it whole," replied Glenarvan.

[Illustration: The fragments soon strewed the table, and several pieces
of paper were perceived adhering to each other. Glenarvan drew them out
carefully.]

"Yes, yes, my dear Edward!" cried Lady Glenarvan.

It was difficult to proceed in any other way, and, at all hazards,
Glenarvan determined to break the neck of the precious bottle. It was
necessary to use a hammer, for the stony covering had acquired the
hardness of granite. The fragments soon strewed the table, and several
pieces of paper were perceived adhering to each other. Glenarvan drew
them out carefully, separating and examining them closely, while Lady
Helena, the major, and the captain crowded around him.

These pieces of paper, half destroyed by the sea-water, exhibited only
a few words, the traces of handwriting almost entirely effaced. For
several minutes Lord Glenarvan examined them attentively, turned them
about in every way, and exposed them to the light of day, observing
the least traces of writing spared by the sea. Then he looked at his
friends, who were regarding him with anxious eyes.

"But these words have at least a meaning?" said Lady Glenarvan.

"We will do so," said Lord Glenarvan; "but let us proceed
systematically. And, first, here is the English document."

"We shall find them," said Lord Edward.

"And do you know that language?" asked Glenarvan.

"Yes, bring them assistance," said Glenarvan. "But where are the
unfortunates? We have not yet a single indication of the place, and the
scene of the catastrophe is absolutely unknown."

"Let us look at it, then," replied Glenarvan; "and, as we all know this
language, our examination will be more easy."

"Let us proceed in order," said Lord Glenarvan, "and start at
the beginning. Permit me to point out one by one these scattered
and incomplete words. I see from the first letters _troi_ _ats_
(_trois-mats_), that it is a brig, the name of which, thanks to the
English and French documents, is entirely preserved: _The Britannia_.
Of the two following words, _gonie_ and _austral_, only the last has an
intelligible meaning."

"I will continue," resumed Glenarvan. "The word _abor_ is the trace of
the verb _aborder_ (to land). These unfortunates have landed somewhere.
But where? _Contin!_ Is it on a continent? _Cruel!_"

"Go on, go on!" cried Glenarvan, whose interest was greatly excited as
the meaning of these incomplete words was elucidated. "_Indi_! Is it
India, then, where these sailors have been cast? What is the meaning of
the word _ongit_? Ha, longitude! And here is the latitude, 37° 11'. In
short, we have a definite indication."

"We cannot have everything, my dear major," replied Glenarvan; "and
an exact degree of latitude is something. This French document is
decidedly the most complete of the three. Each of them was evidently
a literal translation of the others, for they all convey the same
information. We must, therefore, unite and translate them into one
language, and seek their most probable meaning, the one that is most
logical and explicit."

"In English," answered Glenarvan, "since that is our own language."

Glenarvan at once took a pen, and, in a few moments, presented to his
friends a paper on which were written the following lines:

"What are your lordship's wishes?" said the captain, addressing Lord
Glenarvan.

"Now, my friends," said Glenarvan, "we will continue our
investigations. We are on the track of a great catastrophe. The lives
of several men depend upon our sagacity. Let us use therefore all our
ingenuity to divine the secret of this enigma."

"We are ready, my dear Edward," replied Lady Helena.

"First of all," continued Glenarvan, "we must consider three distinct
points in this document. First, what is known; second, what can be
conjectured; and third, what is unknown. What do we know? That on the
7th of June, 1862, a brig, the Britannia, of Glasgow, was wrecked;
that two sailors and the captain threw this document into the sea in
latitude 37° 11', and in it ask for assistance."

"What can we conjecture?" resumed Glenarvan. "First, that the
shipwreck took place in the South Seas; and now I call your attention
to the word _gonia_. Does it not indicate the name of the country which
they reached?"

Glenarvan spoke with conviction. His looks betokened an absolute
confidence; and his enthusiasm was communicated to his hearers. Like
him they cried, "It is plain! it is plain!"

A moment after Lord Edward resumed, in these terms:

"Let us see! let us see!" said Lady Glenarvan.

"Grant!" exclaimed Lord Glenarvan; "that hardy Scotchman who wished to
found a new Scotland in the waters of the Pacific?"

"Exactly! exactly!" said Glenarvan; "it is indeed he. The Britannia
left Callao the 30th of May, and on the 7th of June, eight days after
her departure, she was lost on the shores of Patagonia. This is the
whole story elucidated from the remains of these words that seemed
undecipherable. You see, my friends, that what we can conjecture is
very important. As to what we do not know, this is reduced to one item,
the missing degree of longitude."

"We know all, then?" said Lady Glenarvan.

Accordingly Lord Glenarvan took the pen again, and wrote, without
hesitation, the following note:

"Good! good! my dear Edward!" said Lady Glenarvan; "and if these
unfortunates see their native country again, they will owe this
happiness to you."

"And they shall see it again," replied Glenarvan. "This document is too
explicit, too clear, too certain, for Englishmen to hesitate. What has
been done for Sir John Franklin, and so many others, will also be done
for the shipwrecked of the Britannia."

Here a coach was waiting to take Lady Helena and Major MacNabb back to
Malcolm Castle. Lord Glenarvan, after embracing his young wife, hurried
to take the express train for Glasgow. But before going, he confided an
important message to a more rapid agent, and a few moments after the
electric telegraph conveyed to the _Times_ and _Morning Chronicle_ an
advertisement in the following terms:

"For any information concerning the brig Britannia of Glasgow, Captain
Grant, address Lord Glenarvan, Malcolm Castle, Luss, County of
Dumbarton, Scotland."

The castle of Malcolm, one of the most romantic in Scotland, is
situated near the village of Luss, whose pretty valley it crowns. The
limpid waters of Loch Lomond bathe the granite of its walls. From time
immemorial it has belonged to the Glenarvan family, who have preserved
in the country of Rob Roy and Fergus MacGregor the hospitable customs
of the ancient heroes of Walter Scott. At the epoch of the social
revolution in Scotland, a great number of vassals were expelled,
because they could not pay the great rents to the ancient chiefs
of the clans. Some died of hunger, others became fishermen, others
emigrated. There was general despair.

Among all these the Glenarvans alone believed that fidelity bound the
high as well as the low, and they remained faithful to their tenants.
Not one left the roof under which he was born; not one abandoned the
soil where his ancestors reposed; all continued in the clan of their
ancient lords. Thus at this epoch, in this age of disaffection and
disunion, the Glenarvan family considered the Scots at Malcolm Castle
as their own people. All were descended from the vassals of their
kinsmen; were children of the counties of Stirling and Dumbarton, and
honestly devoted, body and estate, to their master.

Lord Glenarvan possessed an immense fortune, which he employed in
doing much good. His kindness exceeded even his generosity, for one
was boundless, while the other was necessarily limited. The lord of
Luss, the "laird" of Malcolm, represented his fellows in the House of
Lords; but with true Scottish ideas, little pleasing to the southrons,
he was disliked by many of them especially because he adhered to the
traditions of his ancestors, and energetically opposed some dicta of
modern political economy.

Lord Edward Glenarvan was thirty-two years old. His form was erect and
his features sharp, but his look was mild, and his character thoroughly
imbued with the poetry of the Highlands. He was known to be brave to
excess, enterprising, chivalrous, a Fergus of the nineteenth century;
but good above all, better than Saint Martin himself, for he would have
given his very cloak to the poor people of the Highlands.

Miss Helena did not belong to a noble family, but she was Scotch, which
equaled all nobilities in the eyes of Lord Glenarvan. This charming
young creature, high-minded and devoted, the lord of Luss had made the
companion of his life. He found her one day living alone, an orphan,
almost without fortune, in the house of her father at Kilpatrick. He
saw that the poor girl would make a noble wife, and he married her.

Lord and Lady Glenarvan lived happily at Malcolm Castle, in the midst
of the grand and wild scenery of the Highlands, rambling in the
shady alleys of horse-chestnuts and sycamores, along the shores of
the lake, where still resounded the war cries of ancient times, or
in the depths of those uncultivated gorges in which the history of
Scotland lies written in ruins from age to age. One day they would
wander in the forests of beeches and larches, and in the midst of the
masses of heather; another, they would scale the precipitous summits
of Ben Lomond, or traverse on horseback the solitary glens, studying,
comprehending, and admiring this poetic country, still called "the land
of Rob Roy," and all those celebrated sites so grandly sung by Walter
Scott.

Thus passed the first months of their married life. But Lord Glenarvan
did not forget that his wife was the daughter of a great traveler. He
thought that Lady Helena must have in her heart all the aspirations of
her father, and he was not mistaken. The Duncan was constructed, and
was designed to convey Lord and Lady Glenarvan to the most beautiful
countries of the world, along the waves of the Mediterranean, and to
the isles of the Archipelago. Imagine the joy of Lady Helena when her
husband placed the Duncan at her disposal! Indeed, can there be a
greater happiness than to lead your love towards those charming "isles
where Sappho sung," and behold the enchanting scenes of the Orient,
with all their spirit-stirring memories?

Meantime Lord Glenarvan had started for London. The safety of the
unfortunate shipwrecked men was at stake. Thus, in his temporary
absence, Lady Helena showed herself more anxious than sad. The next
day a dispatch from her husband made her hope for a speedy return; in
the evening a letter hinted at its postponement. His proposal had to
encounter some difficulties, and the following day a second letter
came, in which Lord Glenarvan did not conceal his indignation against
the authorities.

On that day Lady Helena began to be uneasy. At evening she was alone in
her chamber, when the steward of the castle, Mr. Halbert, came to ask
if she would see a young girl and boy who desired to speak with Lord
Glenarvan.

"Bid them come up, steward," said Lady Glenarvan.

"No," answered the boy, in a decided tone; "not with you, but with Lord
Glenarvan himself."

"Lord Glenarvan is not at the castle," replied Lady Helena; "but I am
his wife, and if I can supply his place with you----"

"You are Lady Glenarvan?" said the young girl.

"The wife of Lord Glenarvan, of Malcolm Castle, who published an
advertisement in the _Times_ in regard to the shipwreck of the
Britannia?"

"Alas, alas!" exclaimed Miss Grant, who could not restrain her tears,
while Robert covered the hands of Lady Glenarvan with kisses.

"No; for the very sake of your father, Lord Glenarvan had to take it
to London; but I have told you all it contained, word for word, and
how we succeeded in discovering the exact meaning. Among these remains
of the almost effaced words the water had spared some characters.
Unfortunately the record of the longitude had altogether been
destroyed, but that was the only missing point. Thus you see, Miss
Grant, the minutest details of this document are known to you as well
as me."

"Well, to-morrow, perhaps, Lord Glenarvan will return. My husband
desired to submit this indisputable document to the authorities in
London, to induce them to send a vessel immediately in search of
Captain Grant."

"Yes, my dear miss, and I expect Lord Glenarvan every moment."

"Madam," said the young girl, in a deep tone of gratitude, and with
fervency, "may Heaven bless Lord Glenarvan and you!"

"Dear child," answered Lady Helena, "we deserve no thanks. Any other
person in our place would have done the same. May the hopes that are
kindled be realized! Till Lord Glenarvan's return you will remain at
the castle."

"Strangers! Dear child, neither your brother nor you are strangers in
this house; and I desire that Lord Glenarvan on his arrival should
inform the children of Captain Grant of what is to be attempted to save
their father."

It was not possible to refuse an invitation made with so much
cordiality. It was, therefore, decided that Miss Grant and her brother
should await at Malcolm Castle the return of Lord Glenarvan.

During this conversation, Lady Helena had not spoken of the fears
expressed in her husband's letters concerning the reception of his
petition by the London officials; nor was a word said in regard to the
probable captivity of Captain Grant among the Indians of South America.
Why afflict these poor children with their father's situation, and
check the hopes they had just conceived? It would not change matters.
Lady Helena was, therefore, silent on this point, and, after satisfying
all Miss Grant's inquiries, she questioned her concerning her life, and
situation in the world in which she seemed to be the sole protectress
of her brother. It was a simple and touching story, which still more
increased Lady Glenarvan's sympathy for the young girl.

Such was the sorrowful story that the young girl related to Lady
Glenarvan, in an artless manner, without thinking that through all
those long years of trial she had behaved herself like an heroic
daughter. But Lady Helena thought of this, and several times, without
hiding her tears, she clasped in her arms the two children of Captain
Grant.

[Illustration: "My father, my poor father!" cried Mary Grant, throwing
herself at the feet of Lord Glenarvan.]

The next morning Mary and her brother rose at daybreak, and were
walking in the galleries and water terraces of the castle, when the
sound of a coach was heard in the great court-yard. It was Lord
Glenarvan returning to Malcolm Castle at the full speed of his horses.
Almost immediately Lady Helena, accompanied by the major, appeared
in the court-yard, and flew to meet her husband. But he seemed sad,
disappointed, and angry. He clasped his wife in his arms, and was
silent.

"My father, my poor father!" cried Mary Grant, throwing herself at the
feet of Lord Glenarvan.

"Yes, Edward, Miss Grant and her brother," replied Lady Helena; "the
two children of Captain Grant, who have thus been condemned to remain
orphans."

"Ah, miss!" answered Lord Glenarvan, "if I had known of your
presence----"

He said no more. A painful silence, interrupted only by sobs, reigned
in the court-yard. No one raised his voice, neither Lord Glenarvan,
Lady Helena, the major, nor the servants of the castle, who were
standing about even at this early hour. But by their attitude they all
protested against the conduct of the officials.

After several moments the major resumed the conversation, and,
addressing Lord Glenarvan, said,--

"Miss, where would you go?" said Lord Glenarvan.

Lord Glenarvan shook his head; not that he doubted the clemency of Her
Gracious Majesty, but he doubted whether Mary Grant would gain access
to her; for but few suppliants reach the steps of a throne.

"Edward," said she, "when Captain Grant wrote that letter, and cast
it into the sea, he confided it to the care of God himself, who has
brought it to us. Without doubt He designed to charge us with the
safety of these unfortunates."

"What do you mean, Helena?" inquired Lord Glenarvan, whilst all waited
in silence.

"I mean," replied Lady Helena, "that we ought to consider ourselves
happy in beginning our married life with a good action. You, my dear
Edward, to please me, have planned a pleasure voyage. But what pleasure
can be more genuine or more beneficent than to save these unfortunates
whom hope has almost abandoned?"

"Yes, you understand me, Edward. The Duncan is a good, staunch vessel.
It can brave the Southern seas; it can make the tour of the world,--and
it will, if necessary! Let us start, Edward,--let us go in search of
Captain Grant!"

At these courageous words Lord Glenarvan had extended his arms to his
wife. He smiled. He pressed her to his heart, while Mary and Robert
kissed her hands.

"Hurrah for the lady of Luss! Hurrah! three times hurrah, for Lord and
Lady Glenarvan!"

It has been already said that Lady Helena had a brave and generous
soul. What she had just done was an undeniable proof of it, and Lord
Glenarvan had good reason to trust in this noble woman, who was
capable of comprehending and following him. The idea of sailing to
the rescue of Captain Grant had already taken possession of him when
he saw his petition rejected at London; but he could not have thought
of separating from her. Yet, since she desired to go herself, all
hesitation was at an end. The servants of the castle had received her
proposal with cries of joy; the safety of their brother Scots was at
stake, and Lord Glenarvan joined heartily in the hurrahs that greeted
the lady of Luss.

The scheme once resolved upon, there was not an hour to lose. That
very day Lord Glenarvan sent to Captain Mangles orders to bring the
Duncan to Glasgow, and make every preparation for a voyage to the South
Seas, which might become one of circumnavigation. Moreover, in her
plans Lady Helena had not overestimated the qualities of the Duncan:
of first-class construction with regard to strength and swiftness, she
could without injury sustain a long voyage.

Captain Mangles, we must say, understood his business. Although he
commanded only a pleasure yacht, he was ranked among the ablest of
the Glasgow captains. He was thirty years of age, with rather rough
features, indicating courage and kindness. When a child, the Glenarvan
family had taken him under their care, and made him an excellent
seaman. He had often given proofs of skill, energy, and coolness during
his long voyages, and when Lord Glenarvan offered him the command of
the Duncan, he accepted it with pride and pleasure, for he loved the
lord of Malcolm Castle as a brother, and until then had vainly sought
an opportunity to devote himself to his service.

The mate, Tom Austin, was an old sailor worthy of all confidence; and
the crew of the Duncan was composed of twenty-five men, including
the captain and mate. They all belonged to the county of Dumbarton,
were all tried seamen, sons of the tenants of the family, and formed
on shipboard a genuine clan of honest people, who of course were not
without the national bagpipe. Lord Glenarvan had, in them, a band of
faithful subjects, happy in their avocation, devoted, courageous, and
skillful in the use of arms, as well as in the management of a ship,
while they were ready to follow him on the most perilous expeditions.
When they learned where they were going, they could not restrain their
joyous emotion, and the echoes of the rocks of Dumbarton awoke to their
cries of enthusiasm.

Captain Mangles, while occupied in lading and provisioning his craft,
did not forget to prepare Lord and Lady Glenarvan's apartments for a
long voyage. He likewise provided cabins for Captain Grant's children,
for Lady Helena could not refuse Mary permission to accompany her on
the expedition.

"Be easy, my boy," replied Glenarvan, without adding that the use of
the "cat-o'-nine-tails" was prohibited, and moreover quite needless, on
board the Duncan.

Such, then, were the passengers of this yacht, summoned by unforeseen
circumstances to accomplish one of the most surprising voyages of
modern times. Since her arrival at the wharf at Glasgow, she had
monopolized the public attention. A considerable number came every day
to visit her. They were interested in her alone, and spoke only of her,
to the great umbrage of the other captains of the port, among others
Captain Burton, commanding the Scotia, a magnificent steamer, moored
beside the Duncan, and bound for Calcutta. The Scotia, from her size,
had a right to consider the Duncan as a mere fly-boat. Nevertheless,
all the attraction centred in Lord Glenarvan's yacht, and increased
from day to day.

The time of departure approached. Captain Mangles had shown himself
skillful and expeditious. A month after her trial trip in the Frith of
Clyde, the Duncan, laden, provisioned, and equipped, was ready to put
to sea. The 25th of August was appointed for the time of departure,
which would enable the yacht to reach the southern latitudes by the
beginning of spring. Lord Glenarvan, when his plan was matured, did
not neglect to make investigations into the hardships and perils of the
voyage; yet he did not hesitate on this account, but prepared to leave
Malcolm Castle.

On the 24th of August, Lord and Lady Glenarvan, Major MacNabb, Mary and
Robert Grant, Mr. Olbinett, the steward of the yacht, and his wife, who
was in the service of Lady Glenarvan, left the castle, after taking an
affectionate farewell of their family servants. Several hours afterward
they found themselves on board. Many of the population of Glasgow
welcomed with sympathetic admiration the young and courageous lady who
renounced the pleasures of a life of luxury, and sailed to the rescue
of the shipwrecked sailors.

The apartments of Lord Glenarvan and his wife occupied the entire stern
of the vessel. They consisted of two bed-chambers, a parlor, and two
dressing-rooms, adjoining which was an open square inclosed by six
cabins, five of which were occupied by Mary and Robert Grant, Mr. and
Mrs. Olbinett, and Major MacNabb. As for the cabins of the captain and
the mate, they were situated in the forecastle, and opened on the deck.
The crew were lodged between-decks very comfortably, for the yacht of
course carried nothing but her coal, provisions, and armament.

The Duncan was to start on the night of the 24th, as the tide fell at
three o'clock in the morning. But first those who were present were
witness to a touching scene. At eight in the evening Lord Glenarvan and
his companions, the entire crew, from the firemen to the captain, all
who were to take part in this voyage of sacrifice, left the yacht, and
betook themselves to Saint Mungo, the ancient cathedral of Glasgow.
This antique church, an uninjured relic in the midst of the ruins
caused by the Reformation, and so marvelously described by Walter
Scott, received beneath its massive arches the owners and sailors of
the Duncan.

Captain Mangles informed Lord Glenarvan, who at once came on deck. Very
soon the ebb-tide was felt. The Duncan gave a few shrill whistles,
slackened her cables, and separated from the surrounding vessels. Her
screw was set in motion, which propelled her into the channel of the
river. The captain had taken no pilot. He was perfectly acquainted with
the navigation of the Clyde, and no one could have commanded better. At
a sign from him the yacht started. With his right hand he controlled
the engine, and with his left the tiller, with silent but unerring
skill.

Lady Helena and Mary Grant were able before daybreak to join Lord
Glenarvan, the major, and the captain, on deck. The sunrise was
magnificent. The orb of day, like a gilded metal disk, rose from the
ocean, as from an immense and silvery basin. The ship glided in the
midst of a splendid iridescence, and you would truly have thought that
her sails expanded under the influence of the sun's rays, whilst even
the crew of the yacht silently admired this reappearance of the orb of
day.

"No better weather could be desired, my dear Helena," replied Lord
Glenarvan; "we have no reason to complain of the commencement of the
voyage."

"Will it be a long one, my dear Edward?"

"And how do you bear this voyage, Miss Mary?" inquired Lord Glenarvan.

"My dear child," said Lord Glenarvan, "there is in all this something
providential, which ought to give us hope. We are not merely going, we
are led; we are not seeking blindly, we are guided. And then see all
these brave people enrolled in the service of so good a cause. Not only
shall we succeed in our enterprise, but it will be accomplished without
difficulty. I have promised Lady Helena a pleasure voyage; and, if I am
not mistaken, I shall keep my word."

"Edward," said Lady Glenarvan, "you are the best of men."

"If you talk so," continued Lord Glenarvan, "you will make a great
friend of Captain John; for he thinks nothing in the world can equal
the life of a sailor. He sees no other, even for a woman. Is it not so,
John?"

"And especially when she admires the Duncan!" added Glenarvan.

"Indeed they are, my dear Helena," said Lord Glenarvan. "This yacht
is a part of our old Caledonia,--a detached portion of the county of
Dumbarton, traveling by special favor, so that we have not left our
country. The Duncan is Malcolm Castle, and the ocean is Loch Lomond."

"Well, then, my dear Edward, do the honors of the castle," said Lady
Helena.

"Olbinett, we are going to make a tour of the vessel before breakfast,"
said Glenarvan, as if a journey to Tarbet or Loch Katrine was in
question. "I hope we shall find the table ready on our return."

"Oh!" said Lord Glenarvan, "the major is absorbed in the smoke of his
cigar; we must not disturb him, for I assure you he is an inveterate
smoker, Miss Mary; he smokes all the time, even in his sleep."

"Where did this person come from?" said he to himself. "A friend of
Lord Glenarvan? It is impossible."

"Mr. Burdness?" replied Captain Mangles, who began to suspect the
truth. But was he talking to a fool, or a rogue? This was a question in
his mind, and he was about to explain himself intelligibly, when Lord
Glenarvan, his wife, and Miss Grant came on deck.

"Madam" said he to Miss Grant, "Miss" to Lady Helena, "Sir" he added,
addressing Lord Glenarvan.

"Lord Glenarvan," said Captain Mangles.

"Sir," said Glenarvan, at length, "whom have I the honor of addressing?"

The secretary of the Geographical Society must have been an agreeable
person, for all this was said with much modesty. Lord Glenarvan,
moreover, knew perfectly whom he had met. The name and merit of Jacques
Paganel were well known to him. His geographical labors, his reports
on modern discoveries, published in the bulletins of the Society, his
correspondence with the entire world, had made him one of the most
distinguished scientific men of France. Thus Glenarvan extended his
hand very cordially to his unexpected guest.

"So, Monsieur Paganel," said Glenarvan, "you have chosen Calcutta as
your centre of action?"

"Monsieur Jacques Paganel," said Lord Glenarvan, after a moment
of silence, "that is certainly a fine voyage, and one for which
science would be very grateful; but I will not further prolong your
ignorance. For the present, you must give up the pleasure of seeing
India."

Paganel's amazement cannot be depicted. He looked first at Lord
Glenarvan, always serious; then at Lady Helena and Miss Grant, whose
features expressed a sympathetic disappointment; and finally at Captain
Mangles, who was smiling, and the imperturbable major. Then, raising
his shoulders and drawing down his glasses from his forehead to his
eyes, he exclaimed,--

"On the whole, I am not astonished at this on the part of Jacques
Paganel," said Glenarvan; "he is noted for such blunders. He once
published a celebrated map of America, in which he located Japan.
However, he is a distinguished scholar, and one of the best geographers
of France."

"Well," said Glenarvan, "he can do so now, if he pleases, at our first
landing."

At this moment Paganel, woeful and humble, reappeared on deck, after
convincing himself that his baggage was on board. He kept repeating
those fatal words: "The Duncan! the Duncan!" He could find no others
in his vocabulary. He went to and fro, examining the rigging of the
yacht, and questioning the mute horizon of the open sea. At last he
returned to Lord Glenarvan.

"Come, monsieur," said Glenarvan, "do not despair. Everything can
be arranged, and you will only have to submit to a delay of little
consequence. The Yaroo-tsang-bo-tsoo will wait for you in the mountains
of Thibet. We shall soon reach Madeira, and there you will find a
vessel to take you back to Europe."

"Yes, sir," replied Captain Mangles, "and belongs to his lordship, Lord
Glenarvan----"

"Who begs you to make free use of his hospitality," said Glenarvan.

"Monsieur Paganel," said Lady Helena at length, "if this were only a
pleasure voyage, I would answer: 'Let us all go to India,' and Lord
Glenarvan would not disapprove. But the Duncan is going to recover
some shipwrecked sailors, abandoned on the coast of Patagonia; and she
cannot change so humane a course."

"Well, Monsieur Paganel," said Glenarvan, "it shall be as you desire;
and, for my part, I am happy that I can offer you for a few days the
hospitalities of my vessel. May you not grow weary of our company."

Meanwhile the yacht, favored by the currents, was advancing rapidly
towards the equator. In a few days the island of Madeira came in view.
Glenarvan, faithful to his promise, offered to land his new guest here.

"Very well, at the Canaries," replied Glenarvan. "That will not take us
out of our way."

"As you please, my dear Paganel," replied Glenarvan, who could not help
smiling, and with good reason.

"It is certain," replied Glenarvan, "that the elements declare
themselves against you."

"Our landing is the only thing doubtful," resumed Glenarvan. "Once
at Villa-Praïa, you will not have very uncomfortable quarters; rather
uncleanly, to be sure, in the company of monkeys and swine, whose
surroundings are not always agreeable; but a traveler does not regard
that so critically. Besides, you can hope in seven or eight months to
embark for Europe."

"You had decidedly better have landed at Madeira," rejoined Glenarvan,
"although there is no wine there."

"My dear Glenarvan," continued Paganel at last, "where shall you land
next?"

"Besides," continued Glenarvan with the greatest gravity, "as long as
you are at the Indies, what difference does it make whether they are
the East or the West?"

"I inform you that we shall pass through the Strait of Magellan,"
continued Glenarvan.

"And you, Paganel, you are dying to stay," retorted Glenarvan.

The joy on board was general, when Paganel's resolution was known.
Young Robert threw himself on his neck with very demonstrative
delight. The worthy geographer almost fell backwards. "A rough little
gentleman," said he; "I will teach him geography." As Captain Mangles
had engaged to make him a sailor, Glenarvan a man of honor, the major a
boy of coolness, Lady Helena a noble and generous being, and Mary Grant
a pupil grateful towards such patrons, Robert was evidently to become
one day an accomplished gentleman.

Captain Mangles, according to Lord Glenarvan's orders, had kept close
to the shore of the continent, examining the numerous wrecks that lined
it. A waif, a broken spar, a piece of wood fashioned by the hand of
man, might guide the Duncan to the scene of the shipwreck. But nothing
was seen, and the yacht continued her course and anchored in the harbor
of Talcahuana forty-two days after her departure from the waters of the
Clyde.

Glenarvan at once lowered the boat, and, followed by Paganel, landed
at the foot of the palisade. The learned geographer, profiting by the
circumstance, would have made use of the language which he had studied
so conscientiously; but, to his great astonishment, he could not make
himself understood by the natives.

"Let us go to the Custom-house," replied Glenarvan.

There they were informed by means of several English words, accompanied
by expressive gestures, that the British consul resided at Concepcion.
It was only an hour's journey. Glenarvan easily found two good horses,
and, a short time after, Paganel and he entered the walls of this great
city, which was built by the enterprising genius of Valdivia, the
valiant companion of Pizarro.

Glenarvan appeared little desirous of seeking the causes of this
decline--though Jacques Paganel attacked him on this subject--and,
without losing an instant, betook himself to the house of J. R.
Bentock, Esq., consul of Her Britannic Majesty. This individual
received him very courteously, and when he learned the story of Captain
Grant undertook to search along the entire coast.

But Glenarvan was not discouraged. He returned to Talcahuana, and,
sparing neither fatigue, trouble, or money, he sent men to the coast,
but their search was in vain. The most minute inquiries among the
people of the vicinity were of no avail. They were forced to conclude
that the Britannia had left no trace of her shipwreck.

Glenarvan then informed his companions of the failure of his endeavors.
Mary Grant and her brother could not restrain their grief. It was now
six days since the arrival of the Duncan at Talcahuana. The passengers
were together in the cabin. Lady Helena was consoling, not by her
words--for what could she say?--but by her caresses, the two children
of the captain. Jacques Paganel had taken up the document again, and
was regarding it with earnest attention, as if he would have drawn from
it new secrets. For an hour he had examined it thus, when Glenarvan,
addressing him, said,--

"Are we mistaken as to the supposed scene of the shipwreck?" continued
Glenarvan. "Does not the name Patagonia suggest itself at once to the
mind?"

"In short," said Glenarvan, "does not the word _Indian_ justify us
still more?"

"But that is impossible," replied Glenarvan.

"Your advice then?" asked Glenarvan.

"And wherever he is," replied Glenarvan, "we shall find him, my child.
Nothing is more consistent than our friend Paganel's interpretation,
and we must follow without hesitation the course he has indicated.
Either Captain Grant is in the hands of countless Indians, or is
prisoner in a feeble tribe. In the latter case, we will rescue him. In
the former, after ascertaining his situation, we will join the Duncan
on the eastern coast, sail to Buenos Ayres, and with a detachment,
organized by the major, can overcome all the Indians of the Argentine
Plains."

"Well then, there is no more hesitation," said Glenarvan; "we must
start, and that, too, without delay. What course shall we take?"

"And whom would you constitute the members of such an expedition?"
asked Glenarvan.

"The fewer the better. The only point is to ascertain the situation of
Captain Grant, and not to engage in combat with the Indians. I think
that Lord Glenarvan, as our chief, the major, who would yield his place
to no one, your servant Jacques Paganel----"

"My dear fellow," replied Glenarvan, "we shall leave the ladies on
board, the dearest objects we have in the world. Who would watch over
them, if not the devoted captain of the Duncan?"

"My dear wife," replied Glenarvan, "our journey will be performed with
unusual rapidity, our separation will be short, and----"

When they came to choose the sailors who were to go, they all offered
their services, and Glenarvan was forced to make a choice. He preferred
to have them draw lots, that he might not mortify such brave men. This
was accordingly done; and the mate, Tom Austin, Wilson, a powerful
fellow, and Mulready, were the fortunate ones.

Lord Glenarvan had displayed great energy in his preparations, for he
wished to be ready at the day appointed; and he was. Captain Mangles
likewise supplied his ship with coal, that he might put to sea at any
moment. He wished to gain the Argentine shore before the travelers.
Hence there was a real rivalry between Glenarvan and the captain, which
was of advantage to both.

At last, on the 14th of October, at the time agreed upon, every one was
ready. At the moment of departure the passengers of the yacht assembled
in the cabin. The Duncan was on the point of starting, and already her
propeller was agitating the quiet waters of Talcahuana Bay. Glenarvan,
Paganel, MacNabb, Robert Grant, Tom Austin, Wilson and Mulready, armed
with carbines and Colt's revolvers, were preparing to leave the vessel.
Guides and mules were waiting for them on shore.

"It is time," said Lord Glenarvan at last.

"_En route_!" returned Glenarvan; and at the same instant that the
travelers, giving reins to their animals, followed the road along the
shore, the Duncan started again at full speed on the highway of the
ocean.

The native troop engaged by Glenarvan consisted of three men and a boy.
The leader of the muleteers was an Englishman who had lived in the
country for twenty years. His occupation was to let mules to travelers,
and guide them across the passes of the Andes. Then he consigned them
to the care of a "laqueano" (Argentine guide), who was familiar with
the road over the Pampas.

This Englishman had not so forgotten his native tongue, in the company
of mules and Indians, that he could not converse with the travelers.
Hence it was easy for Glenarvan to make known his wishes, and for
the muleteer to execute his orders, of which circumstance the former
availed himself, since Paganel had not yet succeeded in making himself
understood.

Glenarvan, who knew how to travel and conform to the customs of
different countries, had adopted the Chilian costume for himself and
his friends. Paganel and Robert, two children (a large and a small
one), felt no pleasure in introducing their heads into the national
poncho (a large blanket with a hole in the centre), and their legs
into leathern stirrups. They would rather have seen their mules
richly caparisoned, with the Arab bit in their mouths, a long bridle
of braided leather for a whip, and their heads adorned with metal
ornaments and the "alforjas" (double saddle-bags containing the
provisions).

The custom of the muleteers is to set out at eight o'clock in the
morning after breakfast, and travel thus till it is time to rest at
four o'clock in the afternoon. Glenarvan, accordingly, conformed
to this custom. Precisely when the signal to halt was given by the
catapaz, the travelers arrived at the city of Arauco, situated at the
southern extremity of the bay, without having left the foam-washed
shore of the ocean. They would have had to proceed twenty miles farther
to the west to reach the limits of the thirty-seventh parallel; but
Glenarvan's agents had already traversed that part of the coast
without meeting with any signs of shipwreck. A new exploration became,
therefore, useless, and it was decided that the city of Arauco should
be chosen as their point of departure. From this their course was to
be directed towards the east in a rigorously straight line. The little
party entered the city and took up their quarters in the open court of
a tavern, whose accommodations were still in a rudimentary state.

While supper was preparing, Glenarvan, Paganel and the catapaz took a
walk among the thatch-roofed houses. Except a church and the remains
of a convent of Franciscans, Arauco presented nothing interesting.
Glenarvan attempted to make some inquiries, but failed, while Paganel
was in despair at not being able to make himself understood by the
inhabitants. But, since they spoke Araucanian, his Spanish served him
as little as Hebrew.

Glenarvan thought that Captain Grant, if prisoner of the Indians, must
have been carried by them beyond the Andes. Their search could be
successful only in the Pampas. They must be patient, and travel on
swiftly and continuously.

They advanced in the same order as before, which Robert with difficulty
kept, for his eagerness led him to press forward, to the great
annoyance of his animal. Nothing but a command from Glenarvan would
keep the young boy at his place in the line. The country now became
more uneven; and several hillocks indicated that they were approaching
the mountains.

"But you are making progress, of course?" replied Glenarvan.

In studying this language, Paganel did not, however, neglect his
geographical observations. In these, indeed, he was astonishingly
clever, and could not have found his superior. When Glenarvan
questioned the catapaz about some peculiarity of the country, his
learned companion would always anticipate the answer of the guide, who
then gazed at him with a look of amazement.

That same day they met a road which crossed the line that they had
hitherto pursued. Lord Glenarvan naturally asked its name of their
guide, and Paganel as naturally answered,--

Glenarvan looked at the catapaz.

"Well," said Glenarvan; "but do you know this pass, catapaz?"

"Never mind, my friend," continued Glenarvan; "where the herds of the
Indians pass, we can also; and, since this will keep us in our course,
let us start for the pass of Antuco."

Glenarvan followed in the steps of his guide. He perceived, he _felt_,
his embarrassment, increasing with the difficulties of the way. He did
not dare to question him, but thought that it was better to trust to
the instinct of the muleteers and mules.

The catapaz, after searching vainly for a passage, dismounted, folded
his arms, and waited. Glenarvan approached him.

Glenarvan listened in silence to the words of the catapaz, who had
evidently acted in accordance with his engagement. His mules could go
no farther; but when the proposal was made to retrace their steps,
Glenarvan turned towards his companions, and said,--

"You do not accompany us?" said Glenarvan to the catapaz.

Glenarvan accordingly settled with the catapaz, and dismissed him, his
peons, and his mules. The arms, the instruments, and the remaining
provisions, were divided among the seven travelers. By common consent
it was decided that the ascent should be undertaken immediately, and
that, if necessary, they should travel part of the night. Around the
precipice to the left wound a steep path that mules could not ascend.
The difficulties were great; but, after two hours of fatigue and
wandering, Glenarvan and his companions found themselves again in the
pass of Antuco.

Glenarvan never lost sight of young Robert, whose youth and eagerness
led him to acts of rashness, while Paganel pressed on with all the
ardor of a Frenchman. As for the major, he only moved as much as
was necessary, no more, no less, and mounted the path by an almost
insensible motion. Did he perceive that he had been ascending
for several hours? It is not certain. Perhaps he imagined he was
descending.

The strength of the little troop, however, in spite of their courage,
was almost gone. Glenarvan, seeing the exhaustion of his companions,
regretted having engaged in the undertaking. Young Robert struggled
against fatigue, but could go no farther.

"Do you all agree?" asked Glenarvan.

Exhaustion was about to put an end to this too prolonged ascent; and
Glenarvan was considering with terror the extent of the snow, the cold
which in this fatal region was so much to be dreaded, the shadows that
were deepening on the solitary peaks, and the absence of a shelter for
the night, when the major stopped him, and, in a calm tone, said,--

"Here is a shelter, at least," said Glenarvan, "even if it is not
comfortable. Providence has led us hither, and we cannot do better than
accept this fortune."

"Our friend is right," added Glenarvan. "Prepare everything for supper;
and I will play the part of wood-cutter."

"No, rest yourself, my brave boy," replied Glenarvan. "You will be a
man when others are only children."

Glenarvan, Paganel, and Wilson went out of the hut. It was six o'clock
in the evening. The cold was keen and cutting, in spite of the calmness
of the air. The azure of the sky was already fading, and the sun
shedding his last rays on the lofty peaks of the mountains.

Paganel and Glenarvan would have remained a long time to contemplate
this magnificent struggle of the fires of earth with those of heaven,
and the improvised wood-cutters were becoming admirers of nature; but
Wilson, less enthusiastic, reminded them of their situation. Wood was
wanting, it is true, but fortunately a scanty and dry moss clothed the
rocks. An ample supply was taken, as well as of a plant whose roots
were quite combustible. This precious fuel was brought to the hut, and
piled in the fire-place; but it was difficult to kindle the fire, and
especially to keep it burning.

His companions had not heard any more, when distant and prolonged howls
were heard. They were not the cries of scattered animals, but those of
a herd approaching with rapidity. Would Providence, after furnishing
them with shelter, give them their supper? Such was the thought of the
geographer. But Glenarvan humbled his joy somewhat by observing that
the animals of the Andes were never met with in so elevated a region.

"Let us see," cried Glenarvan.

"What have you?" asked Glenarvan.

"What is that?" asked Glenarvan.

"You are certain of this?" said Glenarvan.

"As to that, my dear Glenarvan," said Paganel, "it is impossible for me
to say. If you believe me, let us search no farther. For my part I am
dying for want of sleep. Let us retire, major!"

Thereupon each wrapped himself in his poncho, the fuel was replenished
for the night, and soon all but Glenarvan were buried in profound
repose.

Glenarvan returned more uneasy than before, seeking to divine what
relation there was between these subterranean noises and the flight of
the guanacos. He looked at his watch; it was two o'clock.

All at once a violent crash startled him to his feet. It was a
deafening roar, like the irregular noise of innumerable artillery
wagons rolling over a hollow pavement. Glenarvan suddenly felt the
earth tremble beneath his feet. He saw the hut sway and start open.

Glenarvan and his companions, revived by the aid of the major,
gradually recovered consciousness. Indeed, they had only undergone
a severe giddiness. The mountain was descended, and they would have
applauded a means of locomotion which had been entirely at nature's
expense, if one of the feeblest, Robert Grant, had not been missing.
Every one loved the courageous boy: Paganel was particularly attached
to him; the major, too, in spite of his coldness; but especially
Glenarvan.

"Well," continued Glenarvan, "you understand me; you are silent! You
have no more hope!"

Towards noon Glenarvan and his companions, bruised and exhausted, found
themselves again in the valley. The former was a prey to the most
violent grief. He scarcely spoke, and from his lips issued only these
words, broken by sighs,--"I will not go; I will not go!"

"Yes," replied MacNabb, "let us remain, since Edward wishes it. He
hopes: but what does he hope?"

Trees thronged the valley in great numbers. The major chose a group of
lofty carob-trees, under which was established a temporary encampment.
A few blankets, the arms, a little dried meat, and some rice, was
all that remained to the travelers. A stream, which flowed not far
off, furnished water, still muddy from the effects of the avalanche.
Mulready kindled a fire on the grass, and soon presented to his master
a warm and comforting repast. But Glenarvan refused it, and remained
stretched on his poncho in profound prostration.

Thus the day passed. Night came, clear and calm as the preceding. While
his companions lay motionless, although wakeful, Glenarvan reascended
the mountain. He listened closely, still hoping that a last cry might
reach him. He ventured alone and afar, pressing his ear to the ground,
listening, restraining the beatings of his heart, and calling in a
voice of despair.

Day dawned, and it was necessary to go in search of Glenarvan on
the mountain, and bring him in spite of his reluctance back to the
encampment. His despair was terrible. Who would now dare to speak
to him of departure, and propose leaving this fatal valley? But the
provisions were failing. They would soon meet the Argentine guides
and horses to take them across the Pampas. To retrace their steps was
more difficult than to advance. Besides, the Atlantic was the place
appointed to meet the Duncan. All these reasons did not permit a longer
delay, and it was for the interest of all that the hour for departure
should be no longer deferred.

MacNabb attempted to draw Glenarvan from his grief. For a long time he
spoke without his friend appearing to hear him. Glenarvan shook his
head. At length, words escaped his lips.

When it had passed, Glenarvan asked for another. You would have thought
a condemned man was praying for his life. Thus it continued till about
noon, when MacNabb, by the advice of all, would no longer hesitate, and
told Glenarvan that they must go, the lives of his companions depended
upon a prompt decision.

"Yes, yes," replied Glenarvan, "we will go, we will go!"

"Yes, a condor," replied Glenarvan. "Who knows? He is coming, he is
descending! Let us wait."

What did Glenarvan hope? Was his reason wandering? He had said, "Who
knows?" Paganel was not mistaken. The condor became more distinct every
moment.

What had the condor seen? A corpse,--that of Robert Grant? "Who knows?"
repeated Glenarvan, without losing sight of him. The enormous bird
approached, now hovering, now falling with the swiftness of inert
bodies. He soon described circles of larger extent, and could be
perfectly distinguished. He measured fifteen feet across his wings,
which supported him in the air almost without motion, for it is the
peculiarity of these great birds to sail with a majestic calmness
unlike all others of the winged tribes.

The major and Wilson had seized their rifles, but Glenarvan stopped
them with a gesture. The condor was approaching in the circles of his
flight a sort of inaccessible plateau a quarter of a mile distant.
He was turning with a vertical rapidity, opening and closing his
formidable claws, and shaking his cartilaginous neck.

"May Robert's body be dashed upon these rocks," cried Glenarvan,
"rather than serve----"

"Quick! quick!" said Glenarvan; and without seeking whence this
providential shot had come, he rushed towards the condor. His
companions closely followed him.

When they arrived the bird was dead, and the body of Robert was hidden
under its great wings. Glenarvan threw himself upon the child, released
him from the talons of the condor, stretched him on the grass, and
pressed his ear to his breast.

Never did a wilder cry of joy issue from human lips than when Glenarvan
rose, exclaiming:

Glenarvan could not speak. Emotion stifled him, and, kneeling, he wept
beside this child so miraculously saved.

The major, as soon as he perceived him, pointed him out to Glenarvan,
who hastened towards him. The Patagonian took two steps forward;
Glenarvan took his hand, and pressed it. There was in the latter's
look, in his physiognomy, such a feeling, such an expression of
gratitude, that the native could not mistake it. He inclined his head
gently, and uttered a few words that neither the major nor his friend
could understand.

The Patagonian, after regarding the strangers attentively, now changed
the language; but whatever it was, this new idiom was no better
understood than the first. However, certain expressions which he used
struck Glenarvan. They seemed to belong to the Spanish language, of
which he knew several common words.

"No," replied Glenarvan; "this man answered in Spanish."

Paganel's surprise became amazement. The major and Glenarvan looked at
him quizzingly.

"MacNabb," said Glenarvan, "that is not a probable supposition. However
abstracted our friend Paganel may be, we cannot suppose that his
blunder was to learn one language for another."

"Now, my dear Edward, or rather you, my good Paganel, explain to me
what the difficulty is."

"Camoëns!" repeated Glenarvan; "but, unfortunate friend, Camoëns was
a Portuguese! It is Portuguese that you have been studying for six
weeks."

But Glenarvan was particularly rejoiced to discover that the Patagonian
was a guide, and, moreover, a guide of the Pampas. There was,
therefore, something so providential in this meeting that the success
of the enterprise seemed already an accomplished fact, and no one any
longer doubted the rescue of Captain Grant.

Fortunately Thalcave solved the difficulty. This guide, who was
accustomed to conduct travelers along the Patagonian frontiers, and
was one of the most intelligent baqueanos of the country, engaged to
furnish Glenarvan all that his little party needed. He offered to take
him to a "tolderia" (encampment) of Indians, about four miles distant,
where they would find everything necessary for the expedition. This
proposal was made partly by gestures, partly by Spanish words which
Paganel succeeded in understanding. It was accepted, and Glenarvan and
his learned friend, taking leave of their companions, reascended the
stream under the guidance of the Patagonian.

[Sidenote: GLENARVAN GOING TO MARKET.]

Thalcave took upon himself the negotiation, which was not long. In
return for seven small Argentine horses, all saddled, a hundred pounds
of dried meat, a few measures of rice, and some leathern bottles for
water, the Indians received twenty ounces of gold, the value of which
they perfectly understood. Glenarvan would have bought another horse
for the Patagonian, but he intimated that it was unnecessary.

The bargain concluded, Glenarvan took leave of his new "providers," as
Paganel expressed it, and returned to the encampment. His arrival was
welcomed by cries of joy at sight of the provisions and horses. Every
one ate with avidity. Robert partook of some nourishment; he had almost
entirely regained his strength, and the remainder of the day was passed
in perfect rest. Various subjects were alluded to: the absent dear
ones, the Duncan, Captain Mangles, his brave crew, and Harry Grant who
was, perhaps, not far distant.

When the Patagonian declined the horse that Glenarvan offered him, the
latter thought that he preferred to go on foot, according to the custom
of certain guides; and indeed, his long legs ought to have made walking
easy. But he was mistaken.

Thalcave, without observing the admiration caused by his natural
grace, ease and courage, took the lead, and the party advanced, now
at a gallop, and now at a walk, for their horses seemed entirely
unaccustomed to trotting. Robert mounted with much boldness, and
speedily convinced Glenarvan of his ability to keep his seat.

He explained that this pampero is frequent on the Argentine Plains. It
is a very dry wind from the southwest. Thalcave was not mistaken, and
during the night, which was quite uncomfortable for people sheltered
with a simple poncho, the wind blew with great violence. The horses lay
down on the ground, and the men near them in a close group. Glenarvan
feared they would be delayed if the storm continued; but Paganel
reassured him after consulting his barometer.

"You talk like a book, Paganel," replied Glenarvan.

During this passage across the continent, Lord Glenarvan watched with
scrupulous attention for the approach of the natives. He wished to
question them concerning Captain Grant, by the aid of the Patagonian,
with whom Paganel had begun to converse considerably. But they
followed a path little frequented by the Indians, for the trails over
the Pampas, which lead from the Argentine Republic to the Andes, are
situated too far to the north. If by chance a wandering horseman
appeared in the distance, he fled rapidly away, little caring to come
in contact with strangers.

However, although Glenarvan, in the interest of his search, regretted
the absence of the Indians, an incident took place which singularly
justified the interpretation of the document.

At this moment Glenarvan, rejoining Paganel, asked what Thalcave said,
and why he had stopped.

When he had told him, Glenarvan said,--

"Did he understand?" inquired Glenarvan.

Glenarvan requested Paganel to ask the Patagonian if he had heard
of any strangers falling into the hands of the Indians, which was
accordingly done.

Glenarvan's joy could not be described. This answer coincided exactly
with the date of the document. But one question remained to be asked.

During the day the monotony of the journey was interrupted. Mulready,
who rode in advance, turned back, signaling the approach of a party of
Indians. This meeting elicited different opinions. Glenarvan thought
of the information that these natives might furnish concerning the
shipwrecked seamen of the Britannia. Thalcave, for his part, scarcely
enjoyed meeting in his journey the wandering Indians of the plains.
He considered them plunderers and robbers, and only sought to avoid
them. According to his orders, the little party collected together, and
made ready their fire-arms. It was necessary to be prepared for any
emergency.

Having halted, they appeared to hold a conference, crying and
gesticulating. Glenarvan advanced toward them; but he had not proceeded
two yards, when the detachment wheeled about and disappeared with
incredible swiftness. The tired horses of the travelers could never
have overtaken them.

Glenarvan was quite disappointed in not speaking with them, as he
expected to obtain additional tidings of the lost sailors; but it
was necessary to push on, if they would reach their destination that
evening.

When each had sat down in the roukah, Paganel asked Thalcave's advice
as to what was best to be done. A rapid conversation, of which
Glenarvan caught a few words, ensued between the geographer and the
Indian. Thalcave spoke calmly, while Paganel gesticulated for both.
This consultation lasted a few minutes, and then the Patagonian folded
his arms.

"What did he say?" inquired Glenarvan. "I thought I understood him to
advise us to separate."

"The plan is good," replied Glenarvan, "and we will follow it without
delay. My horse has not suffered so much yet from want of water, and I
offer to accompany Thalcave."

"Come then, my boy," said Glenarvan, delighted not to be separated from
Robert. "And we three," he added, "will be very stupid if we do not
discover some clear and fresh stream."

"You would deserve it, my intolerable major," said Paganel, smiling.
"But tell me, my dear Glenarvan, how will you understand Thalcave's
language?"

"I suppose," answered Glenarvan, "that the Patagonian and I will not
need to talk. Besides, with the few Spanish words that I know, I shall
succeed well enough on an emergency in giving him my opinion and
understanding his."

"Let us eat first," said Glenarvan, "and sleep till the hour of
departure."

Soon the Patagonian, Glenarvan, and Robert (not without a certain
throbbing of the heart) lost sight of the detachment confided to the
sagacity of the geographer.

"Bravo, Robert!" said Glenarvan. "Thalcave seems to congratulate you.
He praises you, my boy!"

"That is the main point, Robert," said Glenarvan; "but you are too
modest, and I am sure you cannot fail to become an accomplished
equestrian."

"Yes, very singular, Robert," said Glenarvan.

"And old to reverence him, my child," replied Glenarvan, quite moved by
the words that came from this young heart.

Glenarvan grew uneasy. The signs of dryness did not diminish, and the
want of water might result in disastrous consequences. Thalcave said
nothing, but probably thought that if the Guamini was dry it would then
be time to despair, if indeed an Indian's heart has ever experienced
such an emotion.

"Be moderate, my boy," said Glenarvan, who did not set a good example.

"Well," said Glenarvan, "our friends will not be disappointed in their
expectations. They are sure, on arriving at the Guamini, to find an
abundance of clear water, if Thalcave leaves any!"

Thalcave had not waited for Glenarvan's orders to search for a place
to encamp. He had very fortunately found on the banks of the river a
"ramada," a kind of inclosure designed for a cattle-fold and shut in
on three sides. The situation was excellent for the purpose, so long
as one did not fear to sleep in the open air; and that was the least
anxiety of Thalcave's companions. Thus they did not seek a better
retreat, but stretched themselves on the ground in the sun to dry their
water-soaked garments.

"Well, since here is shelter," said Glenarvan, "let us think of supper.
Our friends must be satisfied with the couriers whom they have sent
forward; and, if I am not greatly mistaken, they will have no reason
to complain. I think an hour's hunting will not be time lost. Are you
ready, Robert?"

Glenarvan had conceived this idea because the banks of the Guamini
seemed to be the haunt of the game of the surrounding plains.
"Tinamous," a kind of partridge, plovers called "teru-teru," yellow
rails, and water-fowl of magnificent green were seen rising in flocks.
As for quadrupeds, they did not make their appearance; but Thalcave,
pointing to the tall grass and thick coppice, explained that they
were hidden there. The hunters had only to take a few steps to find
themselves in one of the best game-coverts in the world.

They began to hunt, therefore, and, disdaining the feathered tribe,
their first attempts were made upon the large game of the Pampas. Soon
hares and guanacos, like those that had attacked them so violently on
the Andes, started up before them by hundreds; but these very timid
animals fled with such swiftness that it was impossible to come within
gun-shot. The hunters, therefore, attacked other game that was less
fleet. A dozen partridges and rails were brought down, and Glenarvan
shot a peccary, which was very good eating.

Thalcave, arriving at a proper distance, launched his "bolas" with a
strong hand, and so skillfully that they twisted about the legs of
the ostrich and paralyzed its efforts. In a few moments it lay on
the ground. The Indian soon captured his prize and contributed it
to the common repast. The string of partridges, Thalcave's ostrich,
Glenarvan's peccary, and Robert's armadillo were brought back to camp.
The ostrich and the peccary were immediately stripped of their skin
and cut into small slices. As for the armadillo, it is a dainty animal
which carries its roasting dish with it, and it was, accordingly,
placed in its own bony covering on the glowing embers.

When everything was ready, Glenarvan, Robert, and the Indian wrapped
themselves in their ponchos, and stretched their limbs on a bundle of
alfafares, the usual bed of the hunters of the Pampas.

Glenarvan, Robert, and Thalcave had yielded to the common law, and,
stretched on their thick beds of grass, they enjoyed a refreshing
sleep. The horses, overcome with fatigue, had lain down on the ground:
Thaouka alone, like a true blooded horse, slept standing, spirited in
repose as in action, and ready to start at the least sign from his
master. Perfect tranquillity reigned within the inclosure, and the
embers of the night-fire, as they gradually died out, cast their last
rays over the silent obscurity.

He did not wait long. A strange cry, a mingling of barks and howls,
resounded over the plain. The report of the carbine answered it,
and was followed by a hundred frightful yelps. Glenarvan and Robert
suddenly awoke.

"Yes," replied Glenarvan, "the red wolves of the Pampas."

"You are not afraid of the wolves, my boy?" said Glenarvan.

Speaking thus, Glenarvan endeavored to reassure the lad; but he did
not think without a secret terror of that dense horde of exasperated
beasts. Perhaps there were hundreds of them; and these three, however
well armed, could not advantageously contend against so many and such
antagonists.

By the howls that resounded over the Pampas, and by the multitude of
shadows that flitted about the plain, Glenarvan could not be mistaken
as to the number. These animals had scented a sure prey, horse-flesh or
human flesh, and not one among them would return to his lair without
having his portion. The situation was, therefore, very alarming.

Glenarvan and Robert had stationed themselves so as to defend the
entrance of the ramada, and with their loaded rifles were about to fire
at the first ranks of wolves, when Thalcave turned aside their weapons
already poised for a shot.

"He prohibits us from firing," answered Glenarvan.

This was not, however, the motive which actuated the Indian, but a
graver reason, which Glenarvan understood when Thalcave, raising his
powder-flask and inverting it, showed that it was almost empty.

Glenarvan, at a sign from the Indian, took his place at once, while the
latter, collecting the bedding, grass, and all combustible materials,
piled them at the entrance of the ramada and threw on a burning ember.
Soon a curtain of flame was defined against the dark background of the
sky, and through the openings the plain appeared illumined by great
moving reflections. Glenarvan could therefore judge of the great number
of animals against which they had to defend themselves. Never had so
many wolves been seen together before, nor so excited by rapacity. The
fiery barrier that Thalcave had just opposed to them had redoubled
their fury. Some, however, advanced to the very fire, crowded by
the rear ranks, and burned their paws. From time to time a shot was
necessary to check the howling horde, and at the end of an hour fifteen
bodies lay on the prairie.

Glenarvan gazed at Robert, and felt his heart beat quick with
excitement. He forgot himself, and thought only of this poor child, who
displayed a courage beyond his years. Robert was pale, but his hand did
not leave his weapon, and he awaited with firm bearing the assault of
the enraged wolves.

Meantime, Glenarvan, after coolly considering the situation, resolved
to do something decisive.

It was not without difficulty that these two men succeeded in
understanding each other. Glenarvan, fortunately, knew the habits of
the red wolf. Without this knowledge he could not have interpreted the
words and gestures of the Patagonian.

Glenarvan cast about him a sorrowful glance. He thought of the child
who was there, of his companions, of all whom he loved. Robert said
nothing; perhaps the danger did not appear imminent to his hopeful
spirit. But Glenarvan pictured to himself that terrible event, now
apparently inevitable, the being devoured alive! He was not master of
his emotion; he drew the child to his breast, he clasped him to his
heart, he pressed his lips to his forehead, while tears flowed from his
eyes.

"No, my boy, no," replied Glenarvan; "and you are right. In two hours,
day will appear, and we shall be saved! Well done, Thalcave, my brave
Patagonian!" cried he, as the Indian killed with the butt of his gun
two enormous beasts that were attempting to cross the glowing barrier.

Thalcave discharged his carbine for the last time, stretched out one
more of their enemies, and, as his ammunition was exhausted, folded
his arms. His head sank upon his breast; he appeared to be questioning
himself. Was he searching for some bold, novel, or rash scheme for
repelling this furious herd? Glenarvan did not venture to ask him.

"Perhaps," replied Glenarvan, who was listening with intentness.

The wolves, abandoning their design of penetrating the inclosure by
this entrance, which was defended by weapon and fire, went to the
back of the ramada and sought to assail it in the rear. Their claws
were soon heard rattling against the half-decayed wood. Already their
powerful paws and bloody mouths had forced their way between the
shattered stakes. The horses, bewildered and panic-stricken, broke
their halters and dashed into the inclosure. Glenarvan seized Robert
in his arms, to defend him to the last extremity; and he would have
attempted a rash flight, and rushed out of the ramada, had not his eyes
fallen upon the Indian.

Thalcave, turning like a deer, had suddenly approached his horse,
which was neighing with impatience, and was beginning to saddle him
carefully, forgetting neither strap nor buckle. He seemed no longer to
care for the howls, that were now redoubled. Glenarvan gazed at him
with a dark foreboding.

Just as the Indian was seizing the mane of his horse, Glenarvan caught
him by the arm with a convulsive grasp.

"Quick, quick!" continued the Indian; while Glenarvan said to Robert,
in a voice broken by emotion,--

"No," said Glenarvan, "he will not leave us."

"Very well," said Glenarvan. "Thalcave shall not leave, Robert. He
shows me what I have to do. It is my duty to go, and his to remain with
you."

"I tell you," cried Glenarvan, taking the bridle from the hands of the
Indian, "I will go. Save this boy! I trust him to you, Thalcave!"

Glenarvan, in his excitement, mingled English and Spanish together. But
what matters the language? In such a terrible situation, signs tell
all, and men quickly understand each other.

However, Thalcave resisted, and the discussion was prolonged. The
danger was increasing every moment. Already the broken stakes were
yielding to the teeth and claws of the wolves. But neither Glenarvan
nor Thalcave appeared willing to yield. The Indian had drawn Glenarvan
towards the entrance of the inclosure. He pointed to the plain, now
free from wolves. In his animated language, he explained that not a
moment was to be lost; that the danger, if this plan failed, would be
greater for those who remained; in short, that he alone knew Thaouka
well enough to employ his marvelous agility and speed for the common
safety. Glenarvan blindly persisted in his resolve to sacrifice
himself, when suddenly he was pushed violently back. Thaouka pranced,
reared on his hind legs, and all at once, with a spring, cleared the
barrier of fire and the rampart of bodies, while a boyish voice cried,--

Glenarvan and Thalcave had scarcely time to perceive Robert, who,
clinging to the horse's mane, disappeared in the darkness.

Thalcave and Glenarvan rushed out of the ramada. Already the plain had
resumed its tranquillity, and they could scarcely distinguish a moving
line which undulated afar in the shadows of the night.

Glenarvan sank upon the ground, overcome, in despair, clasping his
hands. He gazed at Thalcave, who smiled with his accustomed calmness.

"But if he falls?" said Glenarvan.

Glenarvan did not reply, but sprang upon Robert's horse, and the two
were soon galloping towards the west in the direction from which their
companions were to come.

For an hour they traveled thus with great speed, gazing around for
Robert, and dreading at each step to behold his mangled body. Glenarvan
tortured the flanks of his horse with his spurs. Suddenly shots were
heard, and reports at regular intervals, like signals for recognition.

"It is they!" cried Glenarvan.

To Glenarvan's joy, Robert was there, alive, borne by the noble
Thaouka, who neighed with pleasure at seeing his master.

"Ah, my boy! my boy!" cried Glenarvan, with unspeakable tenderness; and
Robert and he, dismounting, rushed into each other's arms.

"He lives! he lives!" exclaimed Glenarvan.

Glenarvan, however, asked, even while he admired the lad,--

At ten o'clock Glenarvan gave the signal for departure. The
water-bottles were filled, and they set out. The horses, being greatly
revived, evinced much spirit, and maintained an easy and almost
continuous canter. The next morning they crossed the boundary which
separates the Argentine Plains from the Pampas. Here Thalcave hoped
to meet the chiefs in whose hands he doubted not that he should find
Harry Grant and rescue him and his two companions from slavery.

When he had joined his companions, Paganel found Glenarvan in excited
conversation with the Indian, whom he did not appear to understand.
Thalcave had frequently stopped to examine the horizon, and each time
his countenance expressed a lively astonishment. Glenarvan, not seeing
his ordinary interpreter present, had attempted, but in vain, to
question the Patagonian. So, as soon as he perceived the geographer at
a distance, he cried,--

Paganel conversed a few moments with the Indian, and, turning to
Glenarvan, said,--

"Well, then," inquired Glenarvan, "what course ought we to take?"

Glenarvan was quite disconcerted at finding no Indians on the Pampas,
a circumstance which was little expected. There are ordinarily too
many of them. Some special cause must therefore have removed them.
But a serious question was to be considered. If Captain Grant was a
prisoner of one of these tribes, had he been carried to the north or
to the south? This problem harassed Glenarvan. It was advisable at all
hazards to keep track of the captain. In short, it was better to follow
Thalcave's advice and reach the village of Tandil, where at least they
could obtain information.

The passage of this mountain was accomplished the next day with the
greatest ease. They followed the sandy undulations of a gradually
sloping terrace, which certainly did not present difficulties to
people who had scaled the Andes, and the horses scarcely relaxed their
rapid pace. At noon they reached the abandoned Fort Tapalquem, the
first of the chain of forts built on the southern frontier against the
plundering natives. But not a shadow of an Indian did they encounter,
to the increasing surprise of Thalcave; although, towards the middle of
the day, three rovers of the plain, well armed and mounted, gazed for
a moment at the little party, but prevented their approach, galloping
away with incredible rapidity. Glenarvan was furious.

The next morning Glenarvan and his companions found themselves again
on the plain. The first estancias (vast establishments for raising
cattle), which border upon the Tandil, were descried; but Thalcave
resolved not to stop, but to keep straight on to Fort Independence,
where he wished to obtain information, especially concerning the
singular condition of this abandoned country.

Thalcave, meanwhile, hastened their progress, as he wished to arrive
that evening at Fort Independence. The horses, urged on by their
masters, and following the example of Thaouka, dashed through the
tall grass. They passed several farms, fortified and defended by deep
ditches. The principal house was provided with an elevated terrace,
from which the inmates could fire upon the plunderers of the plain.
Glenarvan might perhaps have obtained here the information that he
sought; but it was wisest to go to the village of Tandil. They did not
stop, therefore, and soon the feet of the horses struck the grassy
sward of the first mountain slopes. An hour afterward the village
appeared at the bottom of a narrow gorge crowned by the embattled walls
of Fort Independence.

Paganel, after giving his companions a brief account of the village of
Tandil, added that they could not fail to obtain information there;
moreover, the fort was always garrisoned by a detachment of national
troops. Glenarvan, accordingly, put the horses into the stable of a
"fonda;" and Paganel, the major, Robert, and he, under the guidance of
Thalcave, proceeded towards Fort Independence.

But Glenarvan had not come to see boys drill, still less to occupy
himself with their nationality or relationship. He did not, therefore,
give Paganel time to express further astonishment, but besought him
to ask for the commander of the fortress. Paganel did so, and one of
the soldiers proceeded towards a small building which served as the
barracks.

Thalcave, addressing him, introduced Lord Glenarvan and his companions.
While he spoke, the commander kept scrutinizing Paganel with quite
embarrassing persistence. The geographer did not know what the trooper
meant, and was about to ask him, when the latter unceremoniously seized
his hand, and said, in a joyous tone, in his own language,--

He then entered into conversation with the commander. Glenarvan would
gladly have put in a word in regard to his affairs, but the soldier
was telling his story, and was not in the mood to be interrupted.
This honest man had left France a long time before; and the native
language was no longer perfectly familiar to him: he had forgotten,
if not words, at least the manner of combining them. As his visitors
soon learned, he had been a sergeant in the French army. Since the
foundation of the fort he had not left it, and commanded it by
appointment from the Argentine government. He was by parentage a
Basque, and his name was Manuel Ipharaguerre. A year after his arrival
in the country, Sergeant Manuel was naturalized, joined the Argentine
army, and married an honest Indian woman, who had twins,--boys, to be
sure, for the sergeant's worthy consort would never present him with
daughters. Manuel did not think of any other calling than that of the
soldier, and hoped, in time, with the help of God, to offer to the
republic a whole battalion of young soldiers.

But this event disconcerted Glenarvan's hopes. If Captain Grant was
a prisoner of the caziques, he must have been carried by them to the
northern frontiers. Yet how and where to find him? Must they attempt
a perilous and almost useless search to the northern limits of the
Pampas? It was a serious matter, which was to be earnestly considered.

"Ah!" cried Glenarvan, conceiving a new hope.

"Several years ago?" said Glenarvan. "You are mistaken. The date of the
shipwreck is definite. The Britannia was lost in June, 1862, less than
two years ago."

"Two?" exclaimed Glenarvan, very much chagrined. "Two Englishmen?"

"But what is to be done?" asked Glenarvan, with as much anxiety as
impatience.

A profound silence followed this declaration. The mistake was palpable.
The sergeant's story, the nationality of the prisoner, the murder
of his companion, and his escape from the hands of the Indians, all
accorded with the evident facts. Glenarvan gazed at Thalcave with a
bewildered air. The Indian then resumed the conversation.

Glenarvan, after this formal response, had nothing more to do at Fort
Independence. He and his friends, therefore, departed, not without
thanking the sergeant and shaking hands with him.

Glenarvan was in despair at this complete overthrow of his hopes.
Robert walked beside him in silence, with tearful eyes, while his
protector could not find a single word to console him. Paganel
gesticulated and talked to himself. The major did not open his lips.
As for Thalcave, his Indian pride seemed humbled at having gone astray
on a false trail. No one, however, thought of reproaching him for so
excusable an error.

In the meantime, Paganel had asked Glenarvan for the document, by
relying on which their search had resulted so unfortunately. He
read it again with unconcealed vexation, seeking to discover a new
interpretation.

"This document is, at all events, clear," said Glenarvan. "It explains
in the most definite manner the shipwreck of the captain and the place
of his captivity."

Fort Independence is one hundred and fifty miles from the shores of
the Atlantic. But for unforeseen and unexpected delays, Glenarvan
could have rejoined the Duncan in four days. He could not, however,
reconcile himself to the idea of returning on board without Captain
Grant, and failing so completely in his search; and did not therefore,
as usual, give the orders for departure. But the major assumed the
task of saddling the horses, renewing the provisions, and making his
arrangements for the journey. Thanks to his activity, the little party,
at eight o'clock in the morning, was on its way down the grassy slopes
of the Tandil Sierra.

Glenarvan, with Robert at his side, galloped on in silence. His
lordship's bold and resolute character did not permit him to accept
this disappointment calmly. His heart beat violently, and his brain was
on fire. Paganel, tormented by the mystery of the document, arranged
the words in every way, as if to draw from them a new meaning. Thalcave
silently resigned himself to Thaouka's sagacity. The major, always
confident, performed his duties like a man upon whom discouragement can
have no effect. Tom Austin and his two sailors shared their master's
annoyance. Once, when a timid hare crossed the path in front of them,
the superstitious Scotchmen gazed at one another.

These manoeuvres, many times repeated, puzzled Paganel and annoyed
Glenarvan. The geographer was accordingly requested to interrogate
the Indian, which he did at once. Thalcave replied that he was
astonished to see the plain so soaked with moisture. Never within his
recollection, since he had performed the office of guide, had his feet
trodden a soil so saturated. Even in the season of the great rains the
Argentine plain was always easily passed.

Paganel was forced to be contented with this answer, and communicated
to Glenarvan the result of the conversation.

"And what does Thalcave advise?" inquired Glenarvan.

It was in this wretchedly cold and exhausted state that they arrived,
towards evening, at a very miserable rancho. Only people who were not
fastidious could have given it the name of a shelter, only travelers in
distress would consent to occupy it. But Glenarvan and his companions
had no choice. They therefore cowered down in the abandoned hut which
would not have satisfied even a poor Indian of the plains. A sorry
fire of grass, which gave out more smoke than heat, was kindled with
difficulty. The torrents of rain made havoc without, and large drops
oozed through the mouldy thatch. The fire was extinguished twenty
times, and twenty times did Wilson and Mulready struggle against the
invading water.

The night was stormy. The sides of the rancho cracked as if they would
break, while the frail structure bent beneath the gusts of wind and
threatened to give way at every shock. The unfortunate horses neighed
in terror without, exposed to the inclemency of the tempest; and their
masters did not suffer less in their miserable shelter. However, sleep
drowned all their troubles at last. Robert first closed his eyes,
reclining his head on Lord Glenarvan's shoulder; and soon all the
inmates of the rancho slept under the protection of God.

The wall of water descried by Thalcave advanced with the speed of a
race-horse. The travelers fled before it like a cloud driven by the
storm. Their eyes sought in vain a place of refuge. Sky and water
mingled together on the horizon. The horses, excited by the danger,
dashed along in a mad gallop, so that their riders could scarcely keep
their seats. Glenarvan frequently glanced behind him.

Meantime the horses, immersed to their breasts, could no longer
advance without extreme difficulty. Glenarvan, Paganel, Austin, all
believed themselves lost, victims of the horrible death of unfortunates
abandoned at sea. Their animals began to lose their footing; six feet
of water was sufficient to drown them.

"Cling to my saddle!" cried Glenarvan to him.

"Your horse, Robert?" continued Glenarvan, turning towards the boy.

"Courage! courage!" cried Glenarvan, who supported Paganel with one arm
and swam with the other.

The tree upon which Glenarvan and his companions had just found refuge
resembled a walnut-tree. It had the same shining foliage and rounded
form. It was the "ombu," which is met with only on the Argentine
Plains. It had an enormous, twisted trunk, and was confined to the
earth not only by its great roots, but also by strong shoots which held
it most tenaciously. It had thus resisted the force of the inundation.

Such was the asylum offered to Glenarvan's little party. Robert and the
nimble Wilson were scarcely perched in the tree, before they hastened
to climb to the topmost branches. Their heads protruded above the dome
of verdure. From this lofty position the view embraced a wide range.
The ocean created by the inundation surrounded them on all sides,
and their eyes could discern no limit. No other tree emerged from
the watery surface; the ombu, alone in the midst of the unconfined
waters, groaned at every shock. At a distance, borne along by the
impetuous current, floated uprooted trunks, twisted branches, thatch
torn from some demolished rancho, beams swept by the waters from the
roofs of cattle-folds, bodies of drowned animals, bloody skins, and,
on a swaying tree, a whole family of growling jaguars that clung with
their claws to this fragile raft. Still farther off, a black speck
almost invisible attracted Wilson's attention. It was Thalcave and his
faithful Thaouka, disappearing in the distance.

"He will be saved, Mr. Robert," said Wilson; "but let us join Lord
Glenarvan."

A moment after, Robert and the sailor descended the three stories
of branches and found themselves among their companions. Glenarvan,
Paganel, the major, Austin, and Mulready were seated astraddle, or
dangling in the branches, according to their own inclinations. Wilson
gave an account of their visit to the top of the tree. All shared his
opinion in regard to Thalcave. The only question was, whether Thalcave
would save Thaouka, or Thaouka Thalcave.

The present situation of these refugees was undeniably insecure. The
tree would not probably give way to the force of the current, but the
rising waters might reach the top branches, for the depression of
the soil made this part of the plain a deep reservoir. Glenarvan's
first care, therefore, was to establish, by means of notches, points
of comparison which enabled him to note the different heights of the
water. The flood was now stationary, and it appeared to have reached
its greatest elevation. This was encouraging.

"And now what shall we do?" asked Glenarvan.

"Very well," said Glenarvan; "but who will give us our beakful?"

"Ah, MacNabb," cried Glenarvan, "this is just like you! You think of
everything, even under circumstances where it is allowable to forget."

"Well," said Glenarvan, "I hope that the inundation will be
considerably lower twenty-four hours hence."

"Our first business, then, is to breakfast," said Glenarvan.

"But how kindle it?" said Glenarvan. "Our tinder is like a wet sponge."

They now breakfasted, sparingly however, for they had to allow for the
following day. The immense basin might not perhaps be empty so soon as
Glenarvan hoped, and, moreover, the provisions were limited. The tree
bore no fruit; but fortunately it afforded a remarkable supply of fresh
eggs, thanks to the numerous nests that loaded the branches, not to
speak of their feathered occupants. These resources were by no means to
be despised. The question now was, therefore, in case of a prolonged
stay, how to secure comfortable quarters.

"I have my revolvers," said Glenarvan.

"Brave and generous Indian!" cried Glenarvan.

[Illustration: Glenarvan, Paganel, the major, Austin, and Mulready were
seated astraddle, or dangling in the branches, according to their own
inclinations.]

Glenarvan, for the first time, had no consoling answer to make.
What hope could he give the child? Had he not followed with rigorous
exactitude the directions of the document?

"It is discouraging as well as annoying," said Glenarvan.

"What do you mean?" inquired Glenarvan. "What do you think ought to be
done?"

"A very simple and reasonable thing, my dear Edward. Let us turn our
faces towards the east, when we are on board the Duncan, and follow
the thirty-seventh parallel even around to our starting-point, if
necessary."

"Do you think, my dear major, that I have not thought of this?" replied
Glenarvan. "Indeed I have, a hundred times. But what chance have we of
succeeding? Is not leaving the American continent departing from the
place indicated by Captain Grant himself, from Patagonia, so clearly
named in the document?"

"I do not deny it," replied Glenarvan.

"Listen to me, my friends," continued Glenarvan, after a few moments
of reflection, "and you too, Robert, for this is a serious question.
I shall do everything possible to find Captain Grant, as I have
undertaken to do, and shall devote my entire life, if necessary,
to this object. All Scotland would join me to save this noble man
who sacrificed himself for her. I too think, however slight may
be the chance, that we ought to make the tour of the world on the
thirty-seventh parallel; and I shall do so. But this is not the point
to be settled: there is a much more important one, and it is this:
Ought we once and for all to abandon our search on the American
continent?"

"Well?" resumed Glenarvan, addressing the major more especially.

"My dear Edward," replied MacNabb, "it would involve too great a
responsibility to answer you now. The case requires consideration.
But first of all I desire to know what countries the thirty-seventh
parallel crosses."

"That is Paganel's business," replied Glenarvan.

This last sentence was not finished. Did the geographer hesitate?
Did he know no more? No; but a startling cry was heard in the top of
the tree. Glenarvan and his friends grew pale as they gazed at each
other. Had a new calamity happened? Had the unfortunate Paganel fallen?
Already Wilson and Mulready were hastening to his assistance, when a
long body appeared. Paganel dangled from branch to branch. His hands
could grasp nothing. Was he alive, or dead? They did not know; but
he was about to fall into the roaring waters, when the major, with a
strong hand, arrested his progress.

"Glenarvan, major, Robert, my friends," cried Paganel, "all you who
hear me, we are seeking Captain Grant where he is not."

"What do you say?" cried Glenarvan.

A profound astonishment greeted these unexpected words. What did the
geographer mean? Had he lost his senses? He spoke, however, with
such conviction that all eyes were turned towards Glenarvan. This
declaration of Paganel was a direct answer to the question the former
had asked. But Glenarvan confined himself to a negative gesture,
indicating disbelief in the geographer, who, as soon as he was master
of his emotion, resumed.

"What!" cried Glenarvan, "do you pretend that Captain Grant----"

"Singular!" replied Glenarvan, shrugging his shoulders; "it is simply
impossible!"

"What!" added Glenarvan, in a tone of the greatest incredulity, "do you
pretend, with that document in your possession, that the shipwreck of
the Britannia took place on the shores of Australia?"

"By my faith, Paganel," said Glenarvan, "this is a pretension that
astonishes me greatly, coming from the secretary of a geographical
society."

"My dear Glenarvan," said he, "do not be too hasty in your triumph.
I am going to defeat you completely, as no Englishman has ever been
defeated."

It must be confessed that Glenarvan now gazed fixedly at Paganel.

"Yes," replied Glenarvan, "if you can prove to me that the imperfect
word _gonie_ does not relate to the country of the Patagonians."

This time cheers, congratulations, and compliments greeted Paganel's
words. Austin, the sailors, the major, and Robert especially, were
delighted to revive their hopes, and applauded the worthy geographer.
Glenarvan, who had gradually been undeceived, was, as he said, almost
ready to surrender.

"It is clear," replied Glenarvan, "if the word _continent_ can be
applied to Australia, which is only an island."

"Be assured, my dear Glenarvan, the best geographers are agreed in
naming this island the Australian continent."

"Then I have but one thing to say, my friends," cried Glenarvan. "To
Australia, and may Heaven assist us!"

"Do you know, Paganel," added Glenarvan, "that your presence on board
the Duncan is a providential circumstance?"

After their departure Glenarvan and MacNabb went to consult the notches
on the tree, while Wilson and Mulready revived the smouldering embers.

While Glenarvan and the major were making these observations, reports
resounded in the tree, accompanied by cries of joy almost as noisy.
The clear treble of Robert contrasted sharply with the deep bass of
Paganel, and the strife was which should be the most boyish. The hunt
promised well, and gave hopes of culinary wonders.

When the major and Glenarvan returned to the fire, they had to
congratulate Wilson upon an excellent idea. The honest sailor had
devoted himself to fishing with wonderful success, with the aid of
a pin and a piece of string. Several dozen of little fish, delicate
as smelts, called "mojarras," wriggled in a fold of his poncho, and
seemed likely to make an exquisite dish.

"What!" cried Glenarvan, "you are sorry there are no ferocious beasts?"

Glenarvan, according to his custom, interrupted the debate, and said,--

"However that may be, my good Paganel," said Glenarvan, "so long as
there are no Indians, mulattoes, or negroes among us, I rejoice in
the absence of your dear jaguars. Our situation is not, of course, so
agreeable----"

"Certainly," replied Glenarvan. "Are you at your ease in these
uncomfortable and uncushioned branches?"

"In the meantime," replied Glenarvan, "permit me, my dear friend, to
prefer the sand of a park, the floor of a house, or the deck of a
vessel to this aerial abode."

"Glenarvan," said Paganel, "we must take things as they come. If
favorable, so much the better; if unfavorable, we must not mind it. I
see you long for the comforts of Malcolm Castle."

"It is natural at his age," replied Glenarvan.

But before "retiring to their nest," as Paganel said, Glenarvan,
Robert, and he climbed to the observatory, to examine for the last
time the watery expanse. It was about nine o'clock. The sun had just
set in the sparkling mists of the horizon, and all the western part
of the firmament was bathed in a warm vapor. The constellations,
usually so dazzling, seemed veiled in a soft haze. Still they could
be distinguished, and Paganel pointed out to Robert, for Glenarvan's
benefit, that zone where the stars are most brilliant.

While the geographer was discoursing thus, the whole eastern horizon
assumed a stormy aspect. A dense and dark band, clearly defined,
gradually rose, dimming the light of the stars. This cloud of
threatening appearance soon invaded almost the entire vault of the sky.
Its motive power must have been inherent in itself, for there was not
a breath of wind. Not a leaf stirred on the tree, not a ripple curled
the surface of the waters. Even the air seemed to fail, as if some
huge pneumatic machine had rarefied it. A strong electric current was
perceptible in the atmosphere, and every creature felt it course along
the nerves. Glenarvan, Paganel, and Robert were sensibly affected by
these electric currents.

"You are not afraid of thunder?" asked Glenarvan of the boy.

"It is not the storm that troubles me," said Glenarvan, "but the
torrents of rain with which it will be accompanied. We shall be
drenched to the skin again. Whatever you may say, Paganel, a nest
cannot suffice a man, as you will soon learn to your cost."

"Well, then," said Glenarvan, "let us join our friends and persuade
them to envelop us with their philosophy and their ponchos as closely
as possible, and especially to lay in a stock of patience, for we shall
need it."

"Let us go down," said Glenarvan; "the lightning will soon be here."

Glenarvan now joined the major and the three sailors, and gave them
instructions for the night. A terrible storm was to be expected. After
the first rollings of the thunder, the wind would doubtless break forth
and the tree be violently shaken. It was, therefore, advisable for
every one to tie himself firmly to the bed of branches that had been
appropriated to him. If they could not avoid the torrents of the sky,
they must at least guard against those of the earth, and not fall
into the rapid current that broke against the trunk of the tree. They
wished each other good night without much hope of passing one, and then
each, getting into his aerial resting-place, wrapped himself in his
poncho and waited for sleep.

But the approach of a mighty tempest brings to the hearts of most
sentient beings a vague anxiety of which the bravest cannot divest
themselves. The occupants of the tree, agitated and fearful, could not
close their eyes, and the first thunder-clap found them all awake.
It took place about eleven o'clock, resembling a distant rumbling.
Glenarvan climbed to the end of the branch, and peered out from the
foliage. The dark firmament was fitfully illumined by vivid and
brilliant flashes, which the waters brightly reflected, and which
disclosed great rifts in the clouds. Glenarvan, after surveying the
zenith and the horizon, returned to his couch.

"What do you think, Glenarvan?" asked Paganel.

"It must be confessed, Paganel," replied Glenarvan, "that you choose a
good time to tell us these encouraging things!"

Glenarvan and his companions watched this terrific spectacle in
silence. Sheets of dazzling light glided towards them, and blinding
flashes followed in rapid succession, now showing the calm countenance
of the major, then the speculative face of Paganel or the energetic
features of Glenarvan, and again the frightened look of Robert or the
unconcerned expression of the sailors. The rain, however, did not fall
as yet, nor had the wind risen. But soon the flood-gates of the heavens
opened, and the rain came down in torrents, the drops, as they struck
the surface of the water, rebounding in thousands of sparks illuminated
by the incessant lightning.

Did this rain predict the end of the storm? Were Glenarvan and his
companions to be released with a few thorough drenchings? At the height
of this struggle of the elements, suddenly there appeared at the end
of the branch which extended horizontally, a flaming globe, of the
size of a fist, and surrounded by a black smoke. This ball, after
revolving a few moments, burst like a bombshell, and with a noise that
was distinguishable in the midst of the general tumult. A sulphurous
vapor filled the atmosphere. There was a moment of silence, and then
Tom Austin was heard crying,--

The wind now rose and fanned the flames into fury. Glenarvan and his
friends, speechless with terror, and venturing upon limbs that bent
beneath their weight, hastily took refuge in the other, the eastern
part of the tree.

Glenarvan, Robert, the major, Paganel, and the sailors, were terrified.
A thick smoke was stifling them; an intolerable heat was scorching
them. The fire was extending to the lower part of the tree on their
side; nothing could stop or extinguish it; and they felt themselves
irrevocably doomed to the torture of those victims who are confined
within the burning sides of a sacrificial fire-basket.

"To the water!" cried Glenarvan.

At this sight the unfortunate travelers felt themselves lost indeed. A
horrible death was in store for them,--to perish either by the flames
or by the teeth of the alligators. There are circumstances in which
man is powerless to struggle, and where a raging element can only be
repulsed by another equally strong. Glenarvan, with a wild look, gazed
at the fire and water leagued against him, not knowing what aid to
implore of Heaven.

In a few moments the gigantic water-spout struck the ombu and enveloped
it in its watery folds. The tree was shaken to its very base, so that
Glenarvan might have thought that the alligators had attacked it
with their powerful jaws and were uprooting it from the ground. His
companions and he, clinging to one another, felt the mighty tree give
way and fall, and saw its flaming branches plunge into the tumultuous
waters with a frightful hiss. It was the work of a second. The
water-spout had passed, to exert elsewhere its destructive violence,
and pumping the waters of the plain as if it would exhaust them.

Glenarvan and his companions, delivered from these voracious creatures,
took refuge on the branches to leeward of the fire, while the tree,
wrapped by the blast of the hurricane in glowing sheets of flame,
floated on like a burning ship in the darkness of the night.

At the same moment he raised Robert in his arms and clasped him to his
breast. Glenarvan, the major, and the sailors, delighted to see their
faithful guide again, shook his hands with the most earnest cordiality.
The Patagonian then conducted them to an abandoned estancia. Here
a good fire was burning, which revived them, and on the coals were
roasting succulent slices of venison, to which they did ample justice.
And when their refreshed minds began to reflect, they could scarcely
believe that they had escaped so many perils,--the fire, the water, and
the formidable alligators.

"She is there, at all events," said Glenarvan, "waiting for us."

Glenarvan watched alone. The wind continued strong, and the ocean still
showed the effects of the recent storm. The tumultuous waves broke
at the foot of the sand-banks with the noise of thunder. Glenarvan
could not convince himself that the Duncan was so near him; but as for
supposing that she had not arrived at her appointed rendezvous, it
was impossible, for such a ship there were no delays. The storm had
certainly been violent and its fury terrible on the vast expanse of the
ocean, but the yacht was a good vessel and her captain an able seaman;
she must, therefore, be at her destination.

These reflections, however, did not pacify Glenarvan. When heart and
reason are at variance, the latter is the weaker power. The lord of
Malcolm Castle seemed to see in the darkness all those whom he loved,
his dear Helena, Mary Grant, and the crew of the Duncan. He wandered
along the barren coast which the waves covered with phosphorescent
bubbles. He looked, he listened, and even thought that he saw a fitful
light on the sea.

[Illustration: Glenarvan watched alone. He could not convince himself
that the Duncan was so near him; but as for supposing that she had not
arrived at her appointed rendezvous, it was impossible, for such a ship
there were no delays.]

"Glenarvan. Come, I need your eyes."

"And why my eyes?" said Paganel to himself, delighted, nevertheless, to
be of service to Glenarvan.

He rose, shaking his torpid limbs in the manner of one awakened from
sleep, and followed his friend along the shore. Glenarvan requested
him to survey the dark horizon to seaward. For several moments Paganel
conscientiously devoted himself to this task.

"Well, do you perceive nothing?" asked Glenarvan.

For half an hour he mechanically followed his impatient friend in
absolute silence, with his head bowed upon his breast, sometimes
raising it suddenly. He tottered along with uncertain steps, like those
of a drunken man. At last Glenarvan, seeing that the geographer was in
a state of somnambulism, took him by the arm, and, without waking him,
led him back to his sand-hole, and comfortably deposited him therein.

"Hurrah! hurrah!" replied Glenarvan's companions, rushing to the shore.

Glenarvan, provided with Paganel's telescope, watched the movements of
the Duncan. Captain Mangles could not have perceived them, for he did
not approach, but continued to coast along with only a reefed top-sail.

"They see us!" cried Glenarvan. "It is the Duncan's cannon."

"I hope I shall soon get on board!" exclaimed Glenarvan.

"Patience, Edward! You will be there in two hours," replied MacNabb.

Glenarvan now joined Thalcave, who, standing with folded arms alongside
of Thaouka, was calmly gazing at the waves.

Glenarvan took his hand, and, pointing to the yacht, said,--

"Come, my friend!" continued Glenarvan.

It was clear that the Indian would never leave the prairies, where the
bones of his fathers whitened. Glenarvan knew the strong attachment
of these children of the desert to their native country. He therefore
shook Thalcave's hand, and did not insist; not even when the Indian,
smiling in his peculiar way, refused the price of his services,
saying,--

"Adieu, my friend, adieu!" cried Glenarvan.

The first moments were consecrated to the happiness of meeting.
Lord Glenarvan did not wish the joy in the hearts of his friends to
be chilled by tidings of their want of success. His first words,
therefore, were,--

But as the boat gradually drew near, the illusion vanished. Not only
Lady Helena and the captain, but Mary Grant, had now lost all hope. It
was, therefore, time for Glenarvan to utter his assuring words.

After the first embraces, all were informed of the principal incidents
of the journey; and, first of all, Glenarvan made known the new
interpretation of the document, due to the sagacity of Jacques Paganel.
He also praised Robert, of whom his sister had a right to be proud.
His courage, his devotion, and the dangers that he had overcome, were
conspicuously set forth by his noble friend, so that the boy would not
have known where to hide himself, if his sister's arms had not afforded
him a sure refuge.

"After breakfast, my dear fellow," replied Glenarvan, "we will discuss
in council the programme of the new expedition."

The passengers and the young captain then descended to the cabin.
Orders were given to the engineer to keep up steam, that they might
start at the first signal. The major and the travelers, after a rapid
toilette, seated themselves at the table. Ample justice was done to
Mr. Olbinett's repast, which was declared excellent and even superior
to the splendid banquets of the Pampas. Paganel called twice for every
dish, "through absent-mindedness," as he said. This unfortunate word
led Lady Helena to inquire if the amiable Frenchman had occasionally
shown his habitual failing. The major and Lord Glenarvan looked at each
other with a smile. As for Paganel, he laughed heartily, and promised
"upon his honor" not to commit a single blunder during the entire
voyage. He then in a very comical way told the story of his mistake in
the study of Spanish.

Paganel was applauded, but did not lose a single mouthful. He did not,
however, notice one peculiarity observed by Glenarvan, and that was the
young captain's attentions to his neighbor, Mary Grant. A slight sign
from Lady Helena to her husband told him how matters stood. He gazed at
the two young people with affectionate sympathy, and finally addressed
the captain, but upon a different subject.

"Well, my dear Paganel," added Glenarvan, "unless we are endowed with
ubiquity, we cannot be everywhere. Since you crossed the Pampas, you
could not at the same time double Cape Horn."

Captain Mangles now told the story of his voyage, and was congratulated
by Glenarvan, who, addressing Mary Grant, said,--

No recital could have been more agreeable to Lady Helena and Miss
Grant, and Glenarvan hastened to satisfy their curiosity. He told, word
for word, all about their journey from ocean to ocean. The passage
of the Andes, the earthquake, Robert's disappearance, his capture by
the condor, Thalcave's fortunate shot, the adventure with the wolves,
the boy's devotion, the meeting with Sergeant Manuel, the inundation,
their refuge in the tree, the lightning, the fire, the alligators,
the water-spout, the night on the shores of the Atlantic, all these
incidents, cheerful or serious, excited alternately the joy and terror
of his hearers. Many a circumstance was related that brought Robert
the caresses of his sister and Lady Helena. Never was boy more highly
praised, or by more enthusiastic friends.

"Now, my friends," remarked Lord Glenarvan, when he had finished his
recital, "let us think of the present. Let us return to the subject of
Captain Grant."

When breakfast was over, the party repaired to Lady Helena's
state-room, and, taking seats around a table loaded with maps and
charts, resumed the conversation. Glenarvan explained that the
shipwreck had not taken place on the shores either of the Pacific or
the Atlantic, and that, consequently, the document had been wrongly
interpreted so far as Patagonia was concerned; that Paganel, by a
sudden inspiration, had discovered the mistake and proved that they had
been following a false trail. The geographer was accordingly asked to
explain the French document, which he did to the satisfaction of every
one. When he had finished his demonstration, Glenarvan announced that
the Duncan would immediately set sail for Australia.

"What do you ask, then?" inquired Glenarvan.

Glenarvan and Paganel glanced at each other. The major's remarks were
strictly correct.

"Captain," said Glenarvan, "have you sufficient provisions and coal?"

"The precaution is not a bad one," said Glenarvan.

"Well, then, we will adopt it, and start forthwith," said Lord
Glenarvan.

Whilst the passengers had been thus engaged, Lord Glenarvan had allowed
his crew to employ their time advantageously to themselves in capturing
some of the seals which are so plentiful in these latitudes. A few
hours of their united toil resulted in the death of a large number
of seals who were "caught napping," and in the stowing away, for the
profit of the crew when they should reach the Australian market,
several barrels of the oil obtained from their carcases.

This state of things might be prolonged indefinitely. At evening
Glenarvan consulted the captain on the subject. The latter, whose
supply of coal was rapidly diminishing, appeared much disturbed at the
subsidence of the wind. He had covered his ship with canvas, and set
his studding- and main-sails, that he might take advantage of the least
breeze; but, in nautical language, there was not enough wind "to fill a
hat."

"At all events," said Glenarvan, "we need not complain. It is better to
be without wind than to have a contrary one."

"Do you fear bad weather?" asked Glenarvan, looking at the sky, which,
however, was cloudless.

"John," replied Glenarvan, "the Duncan is a stout vessel, and her
captain a skillful seaman. Let the storm come; we will take care of
ourselves."

The young captain accordingly remained on deck all night. About eleven
o'clock the sky grew threatening towards the south. All hands were
immediately called on deck, to take in the sails. At midnight the wind
freshened. The creaking of the masts, the rattling of the rigging,
and the groaning of bulkheads informed the passengers of the state of
affairs. Paganel, Glenarvan, the major, and Robert came on deck to
render assistance if it should be needed. Over the sky, that they had
left clear and studded with stars, now rolled thick clouds broken by
light bands and spotted like the skin of a leopard.

"Has the storm broken upon us?" asked Glenarvan.

Glenarvan, the major, Paganel, and Robert gazed with admiration and
terror at this struggle with the waves. They clung tightly to the
rigging, unable to exchange a word, and watched the flocks of stormy
petrels, those melancholy birds of the storm, as they sported in the
raging winds.

He came on deck, and, briefly informing Glenarvan of the situation,
begged him to return to the cabin with the others; but the latter
wished to remain.

For John Mangles to express himself so authoritatively, the situation
must have been critical. Glenarvan understood that it was his duty to
obey. He therefore left the deck, followed by his three companions, and
joined the ladies in the cabin, who were anxiously awaiting the result
of this struggle with the elements.

"My brave John is an energetic man," remarked Glenarvan as he entered.

Finally he went in search of Lord Glenarvan, consulted with him in
private, explained their actual situation, viewed it with the coolness
of a sailor who is ready for any emergency, and ended by saying that he
should be obliged perhaps to run the Duncan ashore.

"Very well, captain," replied Glenarvan.

Glenarvan returned to the ladies, who, without knowing all the danger,
felt it to be imminent. They displayed, however, a noble courage, equal
at least to that of their companions. Paganel gave himself up to the
most unreasonable theories concerning the direction of atmospheric
currents, while the major awaited the end with the indifference of a
Mussulman.

He called the passengers on deck, for he did not wish, when the hour
of shipwreck had come, that they should be confined in the cabin.
Glenarvan and his companions gazed at the awful sea. Mary Grant grew
pale.

"John," said Glenarvan in a low tone to the young captain, "I will try
to save my wife, or will perish with her. Do you take charge of Miss
Grant."

Lord Glenarvan shook the hand of the young captain, saying,--

And Captain Mangles felt himself fully rewarded by these simple words.
Glenarvan kept to himself the secret of his anguish, and neither Lady
Helena, Mary Grant, nor Robert suspected the magnitude of the perils
they had just escaped.

Glenarvan and the captain, after mature reflection, resolved that
the Duncan should follow the western shore, seeking traces of the
Britannia, should stop at Cape Bernouilli, where further information
could be obtained, and then continue southward to Melbourne, where her
injuries could be repaired; and, as soon as this was done, that she
should cruise along the eastern shores to finish the search.

However, as Glenarvan justly observed, this interpretation did not
preclude the possibility of Captain Grant's captivity, who, moreover,
had intimated as much by the words "where they will be prisoners of the
cruel Indians." But there was no more reason for seeking the prisoners
on the thirty-seventh parallel than on any other.

This conclusion, after much discussion, was finally accepted, and it
was decided that, if no traces of the Britannia were found at Cape
Bernouilli, Lord Glenarvan should return to Europe, relinquishing all
hope of finding the object of their search.

Glenarvan and his companions entered this opening, and reached the
summit of the cliffs by a very steep ascent. Robert climbed an abrupt
declivity with the agility of a cat, and arrived first at the top,
to the great chagrin of Paganel, who was quite mortified at seeing
himself outstripped by a mere lad of twelve. However, he distanced the
peaceable major; but that worthy was utterly indifferent to his defeat.

The little party surveyed the plain that stretched out beneath them.
It was a vast, uncultivated tract, covered with bushes and brushwood,
and was compared by Glenarvan to the glens of the Scottish lowlands,
and by Paganel to the barren lands of Brittany. But though the country
along the coast was evidently uninhabited, the presence of man, not the
savage, but the civilized worker, was betokened by several substantial
structures in the distance.

"Let us go to the mill," replied Glenarvan.

Glenarvan and his friends had not yet introduced themselves, they had
not had time to declare either their names or their rank, when these
cordial words saluted them:--

"You are an Irishman?" said Glenarvan, taking the hand that the
colonist offered him.

"I expected you," said he, quietly, to Lord Glenarvan.

His guests congratulated him sincerely when his story was finished. He
doubtless expected a similar confidence, but did not urge it. Glenarvan
had an immediate interest in speaking of the Duncan, of his own
presence at Cape Bernouilli, and of the search that they had pursued so
perseveringly. But, like a man who considers the main object in view,
he first questioned his host concerning the shipwreck of the Britannia.

Glenarvan then told the story of the document, the voyage of the
Duncan, and the attempts made to find Captain Grant. He confessed that
his dearest hopes had been destroyed by Mr. O'Moore's discouraging
information, and that he now despaired of ever finding the shipwrecked
seamen of the Britannia.

The astonishment that these words produced cannot be described.
Glenarvan sprang to his feet, and, pushing back his chair, cried,--

"You, Ayrton?" said the colonist, no less astonished than Glenarvan.

The travelers felt all this at first sight. Ayrton's appearance had
interested them; and Glenarvan, acting as spokesman for all, pressed
him with inquiries. This strange meeting had evidently produced a
bewildering effect, and the first questions were, to some extent,
without order.

"You are one of the sailors of the Britannia?" asked Glenarvan.

"What do you know, then?" asked Glenarvan.

This should have been the first question; but, in the excitement of the
moment, Glenarvan, anxious to know where Captain Grant was, had not
inquired where the Britannia was lost. From this point the conversation
assumed a more definite form, and soon the details of the complicated
story appeared clear and exact to the minds of Ayrton's hearers.

"The same! the very same!" cried Glenarvan.

No one noticed these flattering words of Paganel. Glenarvan, Lady
Helena, Mary, and Robert had crowded around Ayrton, and eagerly clasped
his hands. It seemed as if the presence of this man was a guarantee of
the safety of Harry Grant. Since the sailor had escaped the dangers
of shipwreck, why should not the captain be safe and sound? Ayrton
repeated his declaration that if Captain Grant were living he must be
in Australia. He answered with remarkable intelligence and clearness
the many questions that were propounded to him. Miss Mary, while
he spoke, held one of his hands in her own. This sailor had been a
companion of her father, one of the shipwrecked survivors of the
Britannia. He had lived with Harry Grant, had sailed the seas with him,
had braved the same dangers! She could not withdraw her eyes from that
weather-beaten face, and she wept with happiness.

Ayrton acceded to the young girl's request. Glenarvan was reluctant to
interrupt him, and yet many more important questions thronged his mind.
But Lady Helena, pointing out to him Mary's joyful excitement, checked
his inquiries.

Ayrton thanked Mr. O'Moore, and waited for further questions. He
probably thought, however, that the legitimate curiosity of his hearers
ought to be satisfied. What could he say that had not been repeated
a hundred times already? Glenarvan was, therefore, about to open the
conversation on a new topic, to profit by the information received from
Ayrton, when the major, addressing him, said:

Glenarvan was about to answer that he had never doubted Ayrton's
honesty, when the latter returned and presented his contract. It was a
paper signed by the owners of the Britannia and Captain Grant, whose
writing Mary recognized immediately. It stated that "Tom Ayrton, able
seaman, was engaged as quartermaster on board the brig Britannia of
Glasgow." There was, therefore, no possible doubt of Ayrton's identity,
for it would have been difficult to suppose that this contract could be
in his hands and not belong to him.

"Now," said Glenarvan, "I appeal to you all for advice as to what is
best to be done. Your advice, Ayrton, would be particularly valuable,
and I should be much obliged if you would give it to us."

"This fact will complicate our search," said Glenarvan, quite
disconcerted. "How shall we find the traces of the prisoners in the
interior of so vast a continent?"

"Very good," said Glenarvan; "but we must wait till the Duncan is
repaired."

"Do you speak seriously, Paganel?" asked Glenarvan.

"But the ferocious animals?" said Glenarvan, wishing to state all
possible objections.

"What do you think, Helena?" asked Glenarvan.

It was not Glenarvan's habit to lose time in adopting and executing a
plan. As soon as Paganel's proposal was accepted, he at once resolved
that the preparations for the journey should be completed as soon as
possible.

Moreover, if Ayrton would consent to join the travelers, to guide them
through the forests, and to the eastern coast, there was another chance
of success. Glenarvan felt the importance of this arrangement, and was
therefore particularly desirous of obtaining the services of Captain
Grant's companion. He inquired of his host whether he was willing for
him to propose to Ayrton to accompany them. Mr. O'Moore consented,
though not without regret at losing so good an assistant.

The quartermaster was heartily thanked by the travelers. Captain
Grant's children lavished upon him their most grateful caresses. All
were delighted at his decision, except the colonist, who would lose
in him an intelligent and faithful assistant. But he understood the
importance that Glenarvan attached to this new addition to his force,
and was resigned. He had, moreover, engaged to furnish them with the
means of conveyance for the journey, and, this business being settled,
the party returned on board.

When Captain Mangles seconded the proposal that they should attempt to
cross Australia with the ladies, he supposed that this time he would
accompany the expedition. He therefore consulted Glenarvan on the
subject, and brought forward various arguments in his own favor, such
as his desire to take part in the search for his countryman, and his
usefulness in the undertaking.

"One question, John," said Glenarvan. "You have absolute confidence in
your mate?"

"Very well, captain," replied Glenarvan; "you shall accompany us; for,"
added he, smiling, "you certainly ought to be present when we find Mary
Grant's father."

As for the men, seven strong horses were apportioned to Lord
Glenarvan, Paganel, Robert Grant, Major MacNabb, Captain Mangles,
and the two sailors, Wilson and Mulready, who accompanied this new
expeditionary party. The horses and oxen grazed near at hand, and could
be easily collected at the moment of departure.

Having made his arrangements, and given his orders to the carpenter,
Captain Mangles returned on board with the colonist's family, who
wished to pay Lord Glenarvan a visit. Ayrton thought proper to join
them, and about four o'clock the captain crossed the gangway of the
Duncan.

Of course, Glenarvan invited his visitors to dinner, and they willingly
accepted his return hospitality. Mr. O'Moore was amazed. The furniture
of the cabins, the tapestry, the upholstery, and the fancy-work of
maple and ebony excited his admiration. Ayrton, on the contrary, gave
only a secondary attention to these costly luxuries. He first examined
the yacht from a sailor's point of view. He explored the hold; he
went down into the engine-room; he looked at the engine, inquired
its effective power and consumption; he visited the coal-house, the
pantry, and the powder-magazine, and took particular interest in the
gun-room and the mounted cannon in the forecastle. Glenarvan now had to
deal with a man who was a critical judge, as he could see by Ayrton's
keen inquiries. At last the quartermaster finished his exploration by
inspecting the masts and rigging; and, after a few moments of general
review, said:

"A good one, too," replied Glenarvan.

"Thanks, Ayrton," replied Glenarvan; "and now remain on board, and it
will be your own fault if the ship is not all you can desire."

Mr. Olbinett now approached, and informed Lord Glenarvan that dinner
was ready; and they all adjourned to the saloon.

During dinner, Ayrton gave some interesting information concerning
Australia, with which he was perfectly familiar. He inquired the number
of sailors that Glenarvan intended to take with him in his expedition.
When he learned that only two, Wilson and Mulready, were to accompany
them, he seemed astonished. He advised Glenarvan to form his party of
the best seamen of the Duncan. He even insisted upon this point, which
must have removed all suspicion from the mind of the major.

"But," said Glenarvan, "is there any danger in our journey across
Australia?"

The baggage had already been conveyed to the farm through the care of
Captain Mangles. A boat was waiting for the travelers, and they were
not long in embarking. The young captain gave his last orders to Tom
Austin, and instructed him above all to await the commands of Lord
Glenarvan at Melbourne, and execute them scrupulously whatever they
might be. The trusty sailor replied that they might rely on him. In the
name of the crew he offered to his lordship their best wishes for the
success of the expedition. The boat put off, and a thunder of applause
rent the air. In a few moments the party reached the shore, and in no
great length of time arrived at O'Moore's farm.

[Illustration: Ayrton and Olbinett took their places respectively in
front and in the rear part of the cart, while Glenarvan, the major,
Paganel, Robert, Captain Mangles, and the two sailors, mounted their
horses.]

This exchange of compliments was interrupted by the arrival of seven
horses, all harnessed, driven by one of O'Moore's sons. Lord Glenarvan
paid for these new acquisitions, and added many thanks, which the
honest colonist seemed to value as highly as the gold and notes which
he received.

The signal for departure was now given. Lady Helena and Miss Grant
seated themselves in their compartment, Ayrton and Olbinett took their
places respectively in front and in the rear part of the cart, while
Glenarvan, the major, Paganel, Robert, Captain Mangles, and the two
sailors, all armed with carbines and revolvers, mounted their horses. A
"God bless you" was Mr. O'Moore's parting salute, which was echoed in
chorus by his family. Ayrton uttered a peculiar cry, and started his
long team. The cart moved, the timbers cracked, the axles creaked, and
the farm of the honest hospitable Irishman soon disappeared from view
at the turn of the road.

Glenarvan's party invariably found beneath the roof of these solitary
settlers a well-spread and hospitable table; and in the Australian
farmer they always met an obliging host.

The next morning Glenarvan and his companions were greeted with a
magnificent sight. As far as the eye could reach, the landscape seemed
to be one flowery meadow in spring-like luxuriance. The delicate blue
of the slender-leaved flax-plant mingled with the flaming scarlet
of the acanthus, and the ground was clothed with a rich carpet of
green and crimson. After a rapid journey of about ten miles, the cart
wound through tall groups of acacias, mimosas, and white gum-trees.
The vegetable kingdom on these plains did not show itself ungrateful
towards the orb of day, and repaid in perfume and color what it
received in sunshine.

Hitherto few colonists or squatters had been seen. The country seemed
deserted. There was not even the trace of a native; for the savage
tribes wander farther to the north, over the immense wastes watered by
the Darling and the Murray. But now a singular sight was presented to
Glenarvan's party. They were fortunate enough to see one of those vast
herds of cattle which bold speculators bring from the eastern mountains
to the provinces of Victoria and South Australia.

The quartermaster was not mistaken. The thick cloud approached, from
the midst of which issued a chorus of bleatings, neighings, and
bellowings, while the human voice mingled in cries and whistles with
this pastoral symphony. A man emerged from the noisy multitude; it was
the commander-in-chief of this four-footed army. Glenarvan advanced to
meet him, and friendly relations were established without ceremony.
The leader, or, to give him his real title, the "stock-keeper," was
proprietor of a part of the herd. His name was Sam Machell, and he
was on his way from the eastern provinces to Portland Bay. His cattle
comprised one thousand oxen, eleven thousand sheep, and seventy-five
horses. All these animals, bought when lean on the plains of the
Blue Mountains, were to be fattened in the healthy pastures of South
Australia, where they would be sold for a large price.

Such was Sam Machell's account, during which a great part of the
herd had advanced in good order. It was now time for him to join his
army, and choose the best pastures. He therefore took leave of Lord
Glenarvan, mounted a fine native horse that one of his men was holding
for him, and a few moments after had disappeared in a cloud of dust,
while the cart, resuming its interrupted journey, stopped at nightfall
at the foot of Mount Talbot.

"Is there no other way of crossing the river?" asked Glenarvan of the
quartermaster.

"Well, Ayrton," said Glenarvan, "I trust to you."

The horsemen surrounded the heavy vehicle, and the party boldly entered
the river. Usually, when these fordings are attempted, the carts are
encircled by a ring of empty barrels, which support them on the water.
But here this buoyant girdle was wanting, and it was, therefore,
necessary to confide to the sagacity of the oxen, guided by the
cautious Ayrton. The major and the two sailors dashed through the rapid
current some distance ahead, while Glenarvan and Captain Mangles, one
on each side of the cart, stood ready to assist the ladies, and Paganel
and Robert brought up the rear.

Fortunately a vigorous blow upon the yoke brought the cart nearer the
shore. The river grew shallower, and soon men and beasts were in safety
on the opposite bank. Only the front wheels of the cart were damaged,
and Glenarvan's horse had lost the shoes of his fore-feet.

"Very well, Ayrton," said Glenarvan. "How much time do you need to make
the journey and return to the encampment?"

It was not without a certain feeling of apprehension that the major
had seen Ayrton leave the Wimerra to procure a farrier at Black Point
Station. However, he did not breathe a word of his personal suspicions,
but contented himself with exploring the surroundings of the river,
whose tranquillity was undisturbed. As for Glenarvan, his only fear was
to see Ayrton return alone. In the absence of skilled labor, the cart
could not resume its journey, which would be interrupted for several
days perhaps; and his longings for success and eagerness to attain his
end admitted of no delay.

Two hours after, the injuries of the cart were repaired. As for
Glenarvan's horse, he was quickly shod. The farrier had taken care to
bring shoes all prepared. There was a peculiarity about them, however,
which did not escape the major. It was a trefoil rudely carved on the
outer rim. He pointed it out to Ayrton.

At eleven o'clock they arrived at Carlsbrook, quite an important
municipality. Ayrton thought it best to pass by the city without
entering. Glenarvan was of the same opinion; but Paganel, always
eager for something new, desired to visit the place. Accordingly,
the geographer, taking Robert with him as usual, started on his
explorations, while the cart slowly continued its journey. Their
inspection of the town was very rapid, and shortly afterwards they had
joined their companions.

Glenarvan, followed by his companions, urged on his horse, and in a few
moments arrived at Camden Bridge. Here the cause of this agitation was
at once manifest. A terrible accident had occurred, not a collision,
but a running off the track and a fall into the river, which was filled
with the fragments of cars and locomotives. Either the bridge had
given way, or the engine had run off the track; for five coaches out
of six had been precipitated into the bed of the Lutton. The last car,
miraculously preserved by the breaking of its coupling, stood on the
very verge of the abyss. Below was to be seen nothing but a terrible
heap of blackened and bent axle-trees, broken cars, twisted rails, and
charred timbers. The boiler, which had burst at the shock, had thrown
its iron plates to an enormous distance. From this mass of unsightly
objects issued flames and spiral wreaths of steam, mingled with black
smoke. Large spots of blood, scattered limbs, and trunks of burnt
bodies appeared here and there; and no one dared to estimate the number
of victims buried beneath the ruins.

Glenarvan, Paganel, the major, and Captain Mangles mingled with the
crowd, and listened to the conjectures that passed from one to another.
Each sought to explain the catastrophe, while laboring to save what was
left.

Meantime, Lord Glenarvan, having made the acquaintance of the
surveyor-general, was conversing with him and the police-officer. The
latter was a tall, thin man, of imperturbable coolness, who, if he
had any feeling, betrayed no sign of it on his impassible features.
He was like a mathematician engaged upon a problem; he was seeking to
elucidate the mystery of the disaster. To Glenarvan's first words,
"This is a great calamity!" he replied, calmly, "It is more than that."

"More than that!" cried Glenarvan; "and what can be more than that?"

Glenarvan turned to Mr. Mitchell, the surveyor-general, with a
questioning look.

"Then you do not attribute the crime to the natives?" inquired
Glenarvan.

"I thought," observed Glenarvan, "that those who have been transported
had no right to stay in the province of Victoria."

Mr. Mitchell nodded approvingly at the words of the officer. At this
moment the cart arrived at the railroad crossing. Glenarvan, wishing
to spare the ladies the spectacle at Camden Bridge, took leave of the
surveyor-general, and made a sign to his companions to follow him.

On reaching the cart, Glenarvan simply told Lady Helena that a railroad
accident had taken place, without mentioning the part that the convicts
had played in the catastrophe. He reserved this matter that he might
question Ayrton in private. The little party then crossed the track,
not far above the bridge, and resumed their route towards the east.

They had not proceeded far before they reached a native cemetery,
pleasantly situated and with abundance of shady trees. Here for a
time they halted, and, whilst Robert and Paganel were exploring, Lord
and Lady Glenarvan almost stumbled over a queer object. It was human,
indigenous, and sleeping; but at first this was all that they could
decide, until, as the eyes opened and the sleeper roused to active
life, they saw before them a boy of eight years, with a notice pinned
to the back of his jacket which read as follows: "TOLINÉ*, to be
conducted to Echuca, care of Jeff Smith, Railway Porter. Prepaid."

In truth they had reason to act thus. An imprudence, or negligence
even, might cost them dear. Glenarvan, moreover, was not alone in
giving heed to this state of affairs. In the isolated towns and
stations the inhabitants and squatters took precautions against any
attack or surprise. The houses were closed at nightfall. The dogs were
let loose within the palisades, and barked at the slightest alarm.
There was not a shepherd, collecting his numerous flocks on horseback
for the evening return, who did not carry a carbine suspended from the
pommel of his saddle. The news of the crime committed at Camden Bridge
was the reason for this excessive caution, and many a colonist who had
formerly slept with open doors and windows now carefully locked his
house at twilight.

"Just so, my dear Paganel," replied Glenarvan; "and now tell us why the
leaves grow thus."

"Shall we find a comfortable hotel?" asked Glenarvan.

"My dear Edward," replied Lady Helena, "Mary and I accept; but on the
condition that it shall cause no trouble or delay."

"None at all," said Lord Glenarvan. "Moreover, our oxen are fatigued.
To-morrow we will start at break of day."

"Well," inquired Glenarvan, "to whom do they attribute the crime?"

"Read," said the major, handing to Glenarvan a copy of the _Australian
and New Zealand Gazette_, "and you will see that the police-officer was
not mistaken."

Glenarvan read aloud the following passage:

When Glenarvan had finished reading this article, MacNabb turned to the
geographer and said:

"Well, at any rate they are here," continued Glenarvan; "but I do not
suppose that their presence need cause us to change our plans or delay
our journey. What do you think, captain?"

"If Lady Glenarvan and Miss Grant were not with us," said he, "I should
care very little for this band of wretches."

Glenarvan understood him, and added:

The quartermaster, thus addressed, looked at Glenarvan.

The next day the little party, armed and ready for any emergency, left
Seymour, and half an hour after re-entered the forest of eucalyptuses,
which appeared again towards the east. Glenarvan would have preferred
to travel in the open country, for a plain is less favorable to sudden
attacks and ambuscades than a thick wood. But they had no alternative;
and the cart kept on all day between the tall, monotonous trees, and at
evening encamped on the borders of the district of Murray.

The major jocularly insisted that Robert was correct in saying that
he had seen a monkey; but Lady Helena declined to accept his views,
and, getting out of the cart, made friendly advances to these degraded
beings, who seemed to look upon her as a divinity. Reassured by her
gentle manner, they surrounded the travelers, and began to cast wishful
glances at the provisions which the cart contained. Glenarvan, at the
request of his wife, distributed a quantity of food among the hungry
group.

Lord Glenarvan was now about to give the order to advance, when a
native came running up with the news that he had discovered half
a dozen cassowaries. The chase that followed, with the ingenious
disguise assumed by the hunter, and the marvelous fidelity with which
he imitated the movements and cries of the bird, was witnessed with
interest by the travelers. Lady Helena adduced the skill displayed as
a still further argument against the major's theory; but the obstinate
MacNabb declined to recede from his position, citing to his antagonist
the statement of the negroes concerning the orang-outangs,--that they
are negroes like themselves, only that they are too cunning to talk,
for fear of being made to work.

After a peaceful night, the travelers, at seven o'clock in the morning,
resumed their journey eastward over the plains. Twice they crossed the
tracks of squatters, leading towards the north; and then the different
hoof-prints would have been confounded if Glenarvan's horse had not
left upon the dust the Black Point mark, distinguishable by its three
trefoils.

When Wilson came to relieve the geographer, he found him wrapt in a
profound reverie. Paganel said nothing to the sailor, but, reserving
his account of the incident for Glenarvan the next day, he crept into
the tent.

In the morning the whole party were awakened by unexpected bayings.
Glenarvan at once arose. Two magnificent pointers were gamboling along
the edge of a small wood; but at the approach of the travelers they
disappeared among the trees, barking loudly.

"There must be a station in this desert," said Glenarvan, "and hunters,
since those are hunting-dogs."

They immediately dismounted, and advanced towards them, hat in hand.
Glenarvan went to meet them, and introduced himself and party, giving
the name and rank of each member. The young men bowed, and one of them,
the elder, said:

"May I ask, gentlemen, whom I have the honor of addressing?" inquired
Glenarvan.

"Gentlemen," replied Glenarvan, "I should be unwilling to slight a
hospitality so graciously offered----"

Glenarvan bowed in token of assent.

Lord Glenarvan was not satisfied with merely admiring the fairy
wonders of this oasis of the Australian desert. He listened with
profound interest to the young men's story. In England, in the heart
of civilization, a new-comer would have first informed his host
whence he came and whither he was going; but here, by a nice shade
of distinction, Michael and Sandy Patterson thought they should
make themselves known to the travelers to whom they offered their
hospitalities, and briefly told their story.

The young gentlemen were soon made acquainted with the object of the
expedition, and took a lively interest in Glenarvan's search, giving
also great encouragement to the captain's children.

Glenarvan could not decline the invitation of his amiable hosts to
spend the entire day at Hottam Station. The delay thus occasioned
could be turned to good account: the horses and oxen would be
greatly benefited by their rest in the comfortable stables of the
establishment. It was, therefore, decided to remain, and the two young
men submitted to their guests a programme for the day's sports, which
was adopted with alacrity.

"We shall have difficulty in passing here," said Glenarvan, as he gazed
at the chain of mountains, whose outlines were already growing dim in
the twilight. "Alps! that is a name suggestive of arduous climbing."

"You will change your opinion, my dear Glenarvan," replied Paganel.
"You must not think you are in Switzerland."

"To give us the information we need for our journey," replied
Glenarvan. "Let us go in."

Glenarvan, followed by Ayrton, entered the tavern. The landlord of
"Bush Inn" was a coarse man, of forbidding appearance, who had to
consider himself as the principal customer for the gin, brandy, and
whisky of his tavern, and scarcely ever saw any one but squatters or
herdsmen.

He replied in an ill-humored way to the questions that were addressed
him; but his answers sufficed to determine Ayrton upon his course.
Glenarvan, however, remunerated the tavern-keeper for the little
trouble they had given him, and was about to leave the inn, when a
placard, affixed to the wall, attracted his attention. It was a notice
of the colonial police, detailing the escape of the convicts from
Perth, and setting a price upon the head of Ben Joyce--a hundred pounds
sterling to any one who should deliver him up.

"Indeed," said Glenarvan, "that is a rascal worth hanging."

"As for the inn-keeper," added Glenarvan, as he left the room, "I
scarcely put faith in him, despite his placard."

Glenarvan and the quartermaster rejoined the party, and they all
proceeded to where a narrow pass wound across the chain. Here they
began the ascent.

"The beast must have burst a blood-vessel," said Glenarvan.

"Take my horse, Mulready," added Glenarvan; "I will join Lady Helena in
the cart."

All were impatient to gain their destination, the Pacific Ocean,
where the Britannia had been wrecked. There only could traces of the
shipwrecked seamen be found, and not in these desert regions. Ayrton
urged Lord Glenarvan to send an order to the Duncan to repair to the
coast, that he might have at his disposal all the aid possible in his
search. In his opinion they ought to take advantage of the Lucknow
road, which would lead them to Melbourne. Afterwards this might be
difficult, for highways leading directly to the capital would be
absolutely wanting.

Glenarvan was undecided, and perhaps would have sent the order that
Ayrton so particularly desired, if the major had not opposed this plan
with great energy. He explained that Ayrton's presence was necessary
to the expedition; that on approaching the coast the country would be
unknown; that, if chance set them on the track of Captain Grant, the
quartermaster would be more capable than any one else of following it;
in short, that he alone could point out the place where the Britannia
was lost.

"Paganel! Paganel! what is the matter?" cried Lord Glenarvan.

At once Glenarvan, Captain Mangles, and Wilson examined the animal.
Paganel was right. His horse had been suddenly stricken dead.

Glenarvan could not restrain a feeling of uneasiness at this strange
occurrence. It was impossible for them to retrace their steps in this
desert; while, if an epidemic were to seize all the horses, it would be
very difficult to continue the journey.

Captain Mangles and Glenarvan anxiously examined the remaining horses:
perhaps preventives might be found against new calamities. No sign
of disease, however, could be detected. The animals were in perfect
health, and bravely endured the hardships of the journey. Glenarvan,
therefore, was inclined to think that this mysterious epidemic would
have no more victims. This was Ayrton's opinion too, who declared that
he could not at all understand the cause of the frightful mortality.

"What is the matter?" asked Glenarvan, when he perceived that the cart
had come to a stop.

"Very well: be it so," replied Glenarvan.

Ayrton succeeded with difficulty in extricating his three oxen from
the mud, in which they had by this time sunk to their flanks. The
quartermaster picketed them with the four horses, and would allow no
one to give them their fodder. This service he performed himself with
great exactness, and that evening Glenarvan observed that his care was
redoubled, for which he thanked him, as the preservation of the team
was of paramount importance.

It was a terrible night. At two o'clock in the morning the rain began
to fall in torrents, which continued to pour from the stormy clouds
till daylight. The tent was an insufficient shelter. Glenarvan and
his companions took refuge in the cart, where they passed the time
in conversing upon various subjects. The major, however, whose short
absence no one had noticed, contented himself with listening in
silence. The fury of the tempest gave them considerable uneasiness,
since it might cause an inundation, by which the cart, fast in the
mire, would be overwhelmed.

Glenarvan, first of all, turned his attention to the cart. In his eyes,
this was their main support. It was imbedded fast in the midst of a
deep hollow of sticky clay. The fore wheels were almost entirely out of
sight, and the hind ones were buried up to the hubs. It would be a very
difficult matter to pull out the heavy vehicle, and would undoubtedly
require the united strength of men, oxen, and horses.

Glenarvan, the two sailors, the captain, and Ayrton then entered the
wood, where the animals had passed the night.

It was a tall forest of gloomy gum-trees. Nothing met the eye but dead
trunks, widely separated, which had been destitute of their bark for
centuries. Not a bird built its nest on these lofty skeletons; not a
leaf trembled on the dry branches, that rattled together like a bundle
of dry bones. Glenarvan, as he walked on, gazed at the leaden sky,
against which the branches of the gum-trees were sharply defined. To
Ayrton's great astonishment, there was no trace of the horses and oxen
in the place where he had left them. The fettered animals, however,
could not have gone far.

An hour passed in a vain search, and Glenarvan was returning to the
cart, which was at least a mile off, when a neigh fell upon his ear,
followed almost immediately by a bellow.

Glenarvan, Mulready, and Ayrton rushed after him, and soon shared his
astonishment. Two oxen and three horses lay upon the ground, stricken
like the others. Their bodies were already cold, and a flock of hungry
crows, croaking in the mimosas, waited for their unexpected prey.

Glenarvan and his friends gazed at each other, and Wilson did not
suppress an oath that rose to his lips.

"What is the matter, Wilson?" said Lord Glenarvan, scarcely able to
control himself. "We can do nothing. Ayrton, bring the ox and horse
that are left. They must extricate us from the difficulty."

"We will try, John," said Glenarvan. "Let us return to camp, for there
must be anxiety at our long absence."

MacNabb compressed his lips, as if he would repress the words ready
to burst from them. Glenarvan, the captain, and Lady Helena seemed to
expect that he would finish his sentence; but he remained silent, and
walked towards the cart, which Ayrton was now examining.

"What did he mean?" inquired Glenarvan of Captain Mangles.

"What suspicions?" asked Glenarvan. "Does he suppose him capable of
killing our horses and oxen? For what purpose, pray? Are not Ayrton's
interests identical with ours?"

"You are right, my dear Edward," said Lady Helena. "Besides, the
quartermaster has given us, ever since the beginning of the journey,
indubitable proofs of his devotion to our comfort."

"I think so," replied Glenarvan.

Captain Mangles wetted the clay to make it yield, but to no purpose:
the cart was immovable. Unless the vehicle was taken to pieces, they
must give up the idea of getting it out of the quagmire. As tools
were wanting, of course they could not undertake such a task. Ayrton,
however, who seemed determined to overcome the difficulty at any cost,
was about to renew his exertions, when Lord Glenarvan stopped him.

"Now, my friends," added Glenarvan, "let us return to camp, deliberate,
consider our situation, know what our chances are, and come to a
resolution."

"How far are we from Twofold Bay?" asked Glenarvan.

"Very well. Our position being determined," continued Glenarvan, "what
is it best to do?"

"But are we certain to find at the bay the resources that we need?"
asked Glenarvan.

"What say you, captain?" said Glenarvan.

"Fifteen or twenty days to make seventy-five miles!" exclaimed
Glenarvan.

"This Snowy River is broad, then?" remarked Lady Glenarvan.

"What do you think, Ayrton?" asked Glenarvan.

"That is no answer, Ayrton," continued Glenarvan. "Tell us your plan,
and we will discuss it. What do you propose?"

"Very well, Ayrton," replied Glenarvan; "your idea deserves to be
seriously considered. Its greatest objection is the delay it will
cause; but it spares us severe hardships, and perhaps real dangers.
What do you think, friends?"

This answer was rather unexpected; for hitherto MacNabb had always
opposed Ayrton's ideas on this subject. Ayrton, too, was surprised,
and cast a quick glance at the major. Paganel, Lady Helena, and the
sailors had been favorably disposed to the quartermaster's project, and
no longer hesitated after MacNabb's declaration. Glenarvan, therefore,
announced that Ayrton's plan was adopted.

"Now, my friends," said Glenarvan, "it remains only to choose our
messenger. He will have a difficult and dangerous mission; that is
certain. Who is willing to devote himself for his companions, and carry
our instructions to Melbourne?"

"Well said!" replied Glenarvan. "You are a brave and intelligent man,
Ayrton, and will succeed."

"Well then, Ayrton, start," said Glenarvan. "Make haste, and return to
the encampment by way of Eden."

The quartermaster made his preparations for departure, aided by the
two sailors, one of whom attended to his horse, and the other to his
provisions. Meantime Glenarvan wrote the letter designed for Tom Austin.

"As it is pronounced," replied Glenarvan.

The sound of the name of Ben Joyce fell upon the party like a
thunderbolt. Ayrton suddenly sprang to his feet. In his hand was a
revolver. A report was heard; and Glenarvan fell, struck by a bullet.

[Illustration: A report was heard; and Glenarvan fell, struck by a
bullet.]

The tent did not offer a sufficient shelter against the bullets, and
it was clearly necessary to beat a retreat. Glenarvan, who was but
slightly injured, had risen.

The captain, the major, Paganel, and the sailors then seized their
rifles, and stood ready to repel the convicts. Glenarvan and Robert had
joined the ladies, while Olbinett hastened to the common defence.

Lady Helena and Mary Grant's first care had been to dress Glenarvan's
wound. At the very moment that her husband fell, from Ben Joyce's
bullet, in her terror she had rushed towards him. Then, controlling
her emotion, this courageous woman had assisted Glenarvan to the cart.
Here the shoulder of the wounded man was laid bare, and the major
perceived that the ball had lacerated the flesh, causing no other
injury. Neither bones nor large muscles seemed affected. The wound bled
considerably, but Glenarvan, by moving the fingers of his hand and
fore-arm, encouraged his friends to expect a favorable result. When his
wound was dressed, he no longer desired any attention, and explanations
followed. The travelers, except Wilson and Mulready, who were keeping
guard outside, had taken seats as well as possible in the cart, and the
major was requested to speak.

"Then," said Glenarvan, whose face was pale with anger, "Ayrton has
brought us here to rob and assassinate us?"

"Now," replied Glenarvan, "will you tell me how and why Harry Grant's
quartermaster is in Australia?"

"There is no doubt of it," continued MacNabb. "He was meditating
some hostile attack upon the Irishman, when a better opportunity was
offered. Chance threw us in his way. He heard Glenarvan's story of the
shipwreck, and, like a bold man, he promptly decided to take part in
the expedition. At the Wimerra he communicated with one of his friends,
the farrier of Black Point, and thus left distinguishable traces of
our course. His band followed us. A poisonous plant enabled him to
gradually kill our oxen and horses. Then, at the proper moment, he
entangled us in the marshes of the Snowy, and surrendered us to the
convicts he commanded."

Everything possible had been said concerning Ben Joyce. His past had
just been reviewed by the major, and the wretch appeared as he was,--a
bold and formidable criminal. His intentions had been clearly proved,
and required, on the part of Glenarvan, extreme vigilance. Fortunately,
there was less to fear from the detected bandit than the secret traitor.

The discovery of Ayrton's treachery destroyed all hope. The convict, to
entice Glenarvan on, had invented a shipwreck. In their conversation,
overheard by MacNabb, his accomplices had clearly confessed it. The
Britannia had never been wrecked on the reefs of Twofold Bay! Harry
Grant had never set foot on the Australian continent!

In the mean time Glenarvan had joined Mulready and Wilson, who were on
guard without. A deep silence reigned on the plain lying between the
wood and the river. Heavy clouds covered the vault of the sky. In this
deadened and torpid atmosphere the least sound would have been clearly
transmitted; but nothing was heard. Ben Joyce and his band must have
fled to a considerable distance; for flocks of birds that sported on
the low branches of the trees, several kangaroos peacefully browsing on
the young shoots, and a pair of cassowaries, whose unsuspecting heads
were thrust between the tall bushes, proved that the presence of man
did not disturb these peaceful solitudes.

"You have not seen nor heard anything for an hour?" inquired Glenarvan
of the two sailors.

"Very likely, Mulready," replied Glenarvan. "These rascals are cowards.
They know we are well armed, and are perhaps waiting for darkness to
commence their attack. We must redouble our vigilance at nightfall. If
we could only leave this marshy plain and pursue our journey towards
the coast! But the swollen waters of the river bar our progress. I
would pay its weight in gold for a raft that would transport us to the
other side!"

"No, Wilson," answered Glenarvan; "this Snowy is not a river, it is an
impassable torrent."

At this moment Captain Mangles, the major, and Paganel joined
Glenarvan. They had been to examine the Snowy. The waters, swollen by
the recent rains, had risen a foot above low-water mark, and formed
an impetuous current. It was impossible to venture upon this roaring
deluge, these rushing floods, broken into a thousand eddies by the
depressions of the river-bed. Captain Mangles declared that the passage
was impracticable.

"What do you say, captain?" asked Glenarvan.

"But it is a perilous venture, John," said Glenarvan. "Aside from the
dangers of this journey of two hundred miles across an unknown country,
all the roads may be guarded by Ben Joyce's accomplices."

"Before Glenarvan speaks," said Paganel, "I must make a remark. It is
well that one of us should go to Melbourne, but not that these dangers
should be incurred by Captain Mangles. He is the captain of the Duncan,
and must not, therefore, expose himself. Allow me to go in his place."

"My friends," said Glenarvan, "if one of us is to go to Melbourne, let
fate decide. Paganel, write our names----"

"Glenarvan," interposed Paganel, "you cannot leave the encampment."

"No," resumed the major; "your place is here. Edward, you must not go."

"There are dangers to incur," replied Glenarvan; "and I will not leave
my part to others. Write, Paganel; let my name be mingled with those of
my companions, and Heaven grant that it may be the first drawn."

All yielded to this wish; and Glenarvan's name was added to the others.
They then proceeded to draw, and the lot fell upon Mulready. The brave
sailor uttered a cry of joy.

Glenarvan clasped his hand, and then turned towards the cart, leaving
the major and Captain Mangles to guard the encampment. Lady Helena
was at once informed of the decision taken to send a messenger to
Melbourne, and of the result of the drawing by lot. She spoke words to
Mulready that went to the heart of that noble sailor. They knew that he
was brave, intelligent, hardy, and persevering. The lot could not have
fallen better.

While Wilson was occupied with these arrangements, Glenarvan was
preparing the letter designed for Tom Austin; but his wounded arm
disabled him, and he asked Paganel to write for him. The geographer,
who seemed absorbed in one idea, was oblivious to what was passing
around him. It must be confessed that Paganel, in all this succession
of sad misfortunes, thought only of his false interpretation of the
document. He turned the words about in every way to draw from them a
new meaning, and remained wrapt in these meditations. Thus he did not
hear Glenarvan's request, and the latter was forced to repeat it.

So saying, he mechanically produced his note-book. He tore out a blank
page, and then, with his pencil in his hand, made ready to write.
Glenarvan began to dictate the following instructions:

Paganel had just finished this last word when his eyes fell upon the
number of the _Australian and New Zealand Gazette_ that lay upon the
ground. The paper, being folded, only allowed him to see the two last
syllables of its title. His pencil stopped, and he seemed to completely
forget Glenarvan and his letter.

He had risen; he had seized the paper. He shook it, seeking to
repress words ready to escape his lips. Lady Helena, Mary, Robert,
and Glenarvan gazed at him without understanding this inexplicable
agitation. Paganel was like a man whom a sudden frenzy has seized. But
this state of nervous excitation did not last. He gradually grew calm.
The joy that gleamed in his eyes died away, and, resuming his place, he
said, in a quiet tone:

Glenarvan continued the dictation of his letter, which was distinctly
worded as follows:

The letter was now finished, and presented to Glenarvan for his
signature, who, although affected by his recent wound, acquitted
himself as well as possible of this formality. The note was then
folded and sealed, while Paganel, with a hand that still trembled from
excitement, wrote the following address:

"Here is the letter which you are to take to Tom Austin," said
Glenarvan. "Let him not lose an hour, but start for Twofold Bay; and,
if he does not find us there, if we have not crossed the river, let him
come to us without delay. Now go, my brave sailor, and may God guide
you!"

Glenarvan, Lady Helena, Mary Grant, all clasped Mulready's hand. This
departure on a dark and stormy night, over a road beset with dangers,
across the unknown stretches of a desert, would have appalled a heart
less courageous than that of the sailor.

The travelers, after Mulready's departure, ensconced themselves in the
cart. Lady Helena, Mary Grant, Glenarvan, and Paganel occupied the
front compartment, which had been made water-tight. In the rear part
Olbinett, Wilson, and Robert had found a sufficient shelter, while the
major and Captain Mangles were on guard without. This precaution was
necessary, for an attack by the convicts was easy and possible.

At this moment the leathern curtains were raised, and Glenarvan joined
his two companions. He likewise had heard the suspicious whistle, and
the report.

"Let us go!" said Glenarvan, throwing his rifle over his shoulder.

"But if Mulready has fallen beneath the shots of these wretches!"
continued Glenarvan, seizing MacNabb's hand.

"We shall know to-morrow," replied the latter, firmly determined to
prevent Glenarvan from committing a useless imprudence.

In restraining Glenarvan and Captain Mangles the major was right from
every point of view. To attempt to reach the sailor, to go on such
a dark night to meet the convicts, ambuscaded in some coppice, was
useless madness. Glenarvan's little party did not number enough men to
sacrifice any more.

However, Glenarvan seemed unwilling to yield to these reasons. His
hand played nervously with his rifle. He walked to and fro around the
cart; he listened to the least sound; he strove to pierce the dismal
obscurity. The thought that one of his friends was mortally wounded,
helplessly abandoned, calling in vain upon those for whose sake he
had sacrificed himself, tortured him. MacNabb feared that he should
not succeed in restraining him, that Glenarvan, carried away by his
feelings, would cast himself into the power of Ben Joyce.

"Edward," said he, "be calm; listen to a friend; think of Lady Helena,
Mary Grant, all who remain! Besides, where will you go? Where find
Mulready? He was attacked two miles distant at least. On what road?
What path take?"

The cry came from the very direction whence the report had sounded, but
less than a quarter of a mile distant. Glenarvan, pushing back MacNabb,
was advancing along the path, when, not far from the cart, these words
were uttered:

It was a plaintive and despairing voice. Captain Mangles and the major
rushed towards it. In a few moments they perceived, on the edge of
the coppice, a human form that was dragging itself along and groaning
piteously. It was Mulready, wounded and half dead. When his companions
raised him, they felt their hands dabbling in blood. The rain now
increased, and the wind howled through the branches of the dead trees.
In the midst of these terrific gusts, Glenarvan, the major, and the
captain bore the body of Mulready.

The major repeated these words, and glanced at his companions. What did
Mulready mean? Ben Joyce had attacked the sailor, but why? Was it not
simply for the purpose of preventing him from reaching the Duncan? This
letter--Glenarvan examined the sailor's pockets. The letter addressed
to Tom Austin was gone.

Captain Mangles, Paganel, and Glenarvan took a tour of exploration
around the camp. They traversed the path still marked with blood, but
found no trace of Ben Joyce or his band. They went to the place where
the attack had been made. Here two corpses lay on the ground, shot
by Mulready. One was the farrier of Black Point. His face, which had
mortified, was a horrible sight.

Glenarvan did not pursue his investigations farther, prudence
forbidding. He therefore returned to the cart, much alarmed by the
seriousness of the situation.

[Illustration: In the midst of these terrific gusts, Glenarvan, the
major, and the captain bore the body of Mulready.]

"Whatever happens," continued Glenarvan, "we will separate no more.
Let us wait eight or fifteen days, till the waters of the river resume
their natural level. We will then reach Twofold Bay by short journeys,
and from there send to the Duncan by a surer way the order to sail for
the coast."

"Well, then, my friends," resumed Glenarvan, "no more separation! A
man risks too much to venture alone across this desert, infested with
bandits. And now may God save our poor sailor and protect ourselves!"

Glenarvan was right in both resolves, first to forbid any single
attempt to cross the plains, and next to wait patiently on the banks
of the river for a practicable passage. Scarcely thirty-five miles
separated them from Delegete, the first frontier town of New South
Wales, where they would find means of reaching Twofold Bay. From this
point he could telegraph his orders to the Duncan.

On arriving at the camp, Glenarvan found his companions less anxious;
they seemed to have regained hope.

"Yes, Edward," replied Lady Helena. "A reaction has taken place. The
major is more encouraged. Our sailor will live."

"Where is MacNabb?" asked Glenarvan.

Indeed, within an hour the wounded man had rallied from his swoon, and
the fever had diminished. But the sailor's first care, on recovering
memory and speech was to ask for Lord Glenarvan, or, in his absence,
the major MacNabb, seeing him so feeble, would have forbidden all
conversation; but Mulready insisted with such energy that he was forced
to yield. The interview had already lasted some time, and they were
only waiting for the major's report.

Soon the curtains of the cart moved, and he appeared. He joined his
friends at the foot of a gum-tree. His face, usually so calm, betokened
a serious anxiety. When his eyes encountered Lady Helena and the young
girl, they expressed a deep sadness. Glenarvan questioned him, and
learned what the sailor had related.

At this point in the story Glenarvan could not restrain a cry.

"Pirates! pirates!" cried Glenarvan. "My crew massacred, my Duncan in
the hands of these bandits!"

"Like them," answered Glenarvan. "They will cross Kemple Pier bridge,
and we will do the same."

"The bridge? Is it there?" asked Glenarvan, rushing to meet them.

"But what?" cried Glenarvan, who foresaw a new calamity.

It was not the time to despair, but to act. If Kemple Pier bridge was
destroyed, they must cross the Snowy at all events, and reach Twofold
Bay before Ben Joyce's band. They lost no time, therefore, in vain
words; but the next day Captain Mangles and Glenarvan went to examine
the river, preparatory to a passage.

The tumultuous waters, swollen by the rains, had not subsided. They
whirled along with indescribable fury. It was certain death to brave
this torrent. Glenarvan, with folded arms and lowered head, stood
motionless.

"No, John," replied Glenarvan, seizing the bold young man by the hand;
"let us wait."

They both returned to the encampment. The day was passed in the most
lively anxiety. Ten times did Glenarvan return to the river. He sought
to contrive some bold plan of crossing it, but in vain. It would not
have been more impassable if a torrent of lava had flowed between its
banks.

During these long hours of delay, Lady Helena, with the major's
assistance, bestowed upon Mulready the most skillful care. The sailor
felt that he was returning to life. MacNabb ventured to affirm that no
vital organ had been injured, the loss of blood sufficiently explained
the patient's weakness. Thus, as soon as his wound was healed and the
hemorrhage stopped, only time and rest were needed for his complete
restoration. Lady Helena had insisted upon his occupying her end of the
cart. Mulready felt greatly honored. His greatest anxiety was in the
thought that his condition might delay Glenarvan, and he forced them to
promise that they would leave him at the camp in charge of Wilson, as
soon as the river became fordable.

Unfortunately, this was not possible, either that day or the next. At
seeing himself thus detained, Glenarvan despaired. Lady Helena and the
major tried in vain to pacify and exhort him to patience. Patience!
when, at that moment perhaps, Ben Joyce was going on board the yacht,
when the Duncan was weighing anchor and steaming towards that fatal
coast, to which every hour brought her nearer!

Captain Mangles felt at heart all Glenarvan's anguish, and, as he
wished to overcome the difficulty at all hazards, he constructed a
canoe in the Australian fashion, with large pieces of the bark of the
gum-trees. These slabs, which were very light, were held together by
wooden cross-bars, and formed a very frail craft.

Two days were wasted in this way. The major and Glenarvan went five
miles up stream without finding a practicable ford. Everywhere was the
same impetuosity, the same tumultuous rush of water; all the southern
slopes of the mountains had poured their liquid torrents into this
single stream. They were forced, therefore, to give up any hope of
saving the Duncan. Five days had passed since Ben Joyce's departure,
the yacht was probably that very moment at the coast, in the hands of
the convicts.

However, this state of things could not last long. Indeed, on the
morning of the third day, Paganel perceived that the waters were
beginning to subside. He reported to Glenarvan the result of his
observations.

"What does it matter now?" replied Glenarvan; "it is too late!"

"But will that save my unfortunate crew?" cried Glenarvan.

"You are right, John," replied Glenarvan. "We must reach Twofold Bay.
We are only thirty-five miles from Delegete."

"Let us start!" cried Glenarvan.

Each took his place on the raft, which was moored to the bank. Captain
Mangles had arranged on the starboard side, and confided to Wilson, a
kind of oar to sustain the raft against the current, and prevent its
drifting. As for himself, he stood at the stern, and steered by means
of a clumsy rudder. Lady Helena and Mary Grant occupied the centre
of the raft near Mulready. Glenarvan, the major, Paganel, and Robert
surrounded them, ready to lend assistance.

The river was crossed, but the little party were without resources,
thirty-five miles from Delegete, in the midst of these untrodden
deserts. They resolved to start without delay. Mulready saw that he
would cause trouble, and desired to remain behind, even alone, and wait
for aid from Delegete. But Glenarvan refused. He could not reach the
town before three days. If the Duncan had left Melbourne several days
before, what mattered a delay of a few hours?

The litter was made of branches covered with leaves, and upon this
Mulready was placed. Glenarvan wished to be the first to bear the
sailor, and, seizing one end of the litter and Wilson the other, they
started.

However, Glenarvan and his friends were approaching the end of their
sufferings; and it was time. The two ladies exerted themselves
heroically, but their strength was failing every hour. They dragged
themselves along, they no longer walked.

The next day they started at daybreak, and at eleven o'clock Delegete
came in sight, fifty miles from Twofold Bay. Here means of conveyance
were quickly obtained. Feeling himself so near the coast, hope returned
to Glenarvan's heart; perhaps there had been some slight delay, and he
would arrive before the Duncan! In twenty-four hours he would reach the
bay!

At noon, after a comforting repast, all the travelers took their seats
in a mail-coach, and left Delegete at the full speed of five strong
horses. The postilions, stimulated by the promise of a large reward,
drove them along at a rapid rate, over a well-kept road. No time was
lost in changing horses, and it seemed as if Glenarvan had inspired
all with his own intense eagerness.

Glenarvan, Captain Mangles, and Paganel alighted immediately, and
hastened to the custom-house. Here they questioned the employees, and
consulted the latest arrivals. No vessel had entered the bay for a week.

"She may not have started!" cried Glenarvan, who would not despair.
"Perhaps we have arrived before her!"

"I will know what this means," said Glenarvan. "Certainty is better
than doubt."

Fifteen minutes later a telegram was sent to the ship-brokers of
Melbourne, and the travelers repaired to the Victoria Hotel. Not long
after an answer was delivered to Lord Glenarvan. It read as follows:

"Lord Glenarvan,
            Eden, Twofold Bay.

The dispatch fell from Glenarvan's hands. There was no more doubt! The
honest Scotch yacht, in Ben Joyce's hands, had become a pirate-vessel!

Thus ended their search in Australia, begun under such favorable
auspices. The traces of Captain Grant and his shipwrecked sailors
seemed irrecoverably lost. This failure had cost the lives of an entire
crew. Lord Glenarvan was crushed by the blow, and this courageous
searcher, whom the leagued elements had failed to deter, was now
baffled by the malice of men.

If ever the searchers for Captain Grant had reason to despair of seeing
him again, was it not when every hope forsook them at once? To what
part of the world should they venture a new expedition? how explore
unknown countries? The Duncan was no longer in their possession, and
they could not be immediately reconciled to their misfortune. The
undertaking of these generous Scots had, therefore, failed. Failure!
sad word, that finds no echo in a valiant soul; and yet, amid all
the changes of destiny, Glenarvan was forced to acknowledge his
powerlessness to pursue this work of mercy.

"No, Mr. John; let us think of those who have sacrificed themselves.
Lord Glenarvan must return to England."

In this state of affairs, what was to be done? Wait for a ship? They
might be delayed a long time, for Twofold Bay is little frequented.
After some deliberation, Glenarvan was about to decide upon reaching
Sydney by the coast, when Paganel made a proposal that was unexpected
to every one.

Captain Mangles advocated Paganel's plan. He thought it should be
adopted, since they could not wait for the uncertain arrival of other
vessels. But, before deciding, he judged it advisable to visit the ship
in question. Accordingly, he, with Glenarvan, the major, Paganel, and
Robert, took a boat, and pulled out to where it was anchored.

Thereupon Glenarvan, the major, Robert, Paganel, and Captain Mangles
left the vessel, without Will Halley's having so much as touched the
brim of his hat.

"What matter," replied Glenarvan, "so long as he commands the
Macquarie, which goes to New Zealand? We shall see very little of him
on the voyage."

Lady Helena and Mary Grant were very much pleased to know that they
were to start the next day. Glenarvan observed, however, that the
Macquarie could not equal the Duncan for comfort; but, after so many
hardships, they were not likely to be overcome by trifles. Mr. Olbinett
was requested to take charge of the provisions. The poor man, since the
loss of the Duncan, had often lamented the unhappy fate of his wife,
who had remained on board, and would be, consequently, the victim of
the convicts' brutality. However, he fulfilled his duties as steward
with his accustomed zeal, and their food might yet consist of dishes
that were never seen on the ship's table.

In the mean time the major discounted at a money-changer's some drafts
that Glenarvan had on the Union Bank of Melbourne. As for Paganel, he
procured an excellent map of New Zealand.

Wilson went on board first, charged with arranging the passengers'
quarters. Under his vigorous use of the brush and broom the aspect
of things was greatly changed. Will Halley shrugged his shoulders,
but allowed the sailor to do as he pleased. As for Glenarvan and his
friends, he scarcely noticed them; he did not even know their names,
nor did he care to. This increase of cargo was worth fifty pounds to
him, but he valued it less than the two hundred tons of tanned leather
with which his hold was crowded,--the skins first, and the passengers
next. He was a real trader; and by his nautical ability he passed for a
good navigator of these seas, rendered so very dangerous by the coral
reefs.

During the afternoon, Glenarvan wished to visit once more the supposed
place of the shipwreck. Ayrton had certainly been the quartermaster of
the Britannia, and the vessel might really have been lost on that part
of the coast. And there, at all events, the Duncan had fallen into the
hands of the convicts. Had there been a fight? Perhaps they would find
on the beach traces of a struggle. If the crew had perished in the
waves, would not the bodies have been cast ashore?

Glenarvan, accompanied by his faithful captain, undertook this
examination. The landlord of Victoria Hotel furnished them with two
horses, and they set out. But it was a sad journey. They rode in
silence. The same thoughts, the same anxieties, tortured the mind of
each. They gazed at the rocks worn by the sea. They had no need to
question or answer; no sign of the Duncan could be found,--the whole
coast was bare.

Captain Mangles, however, found on the margin of the shore evident
signs of an encampment, the remains of fires recently kindled beneath
the few trees. Had a wandering tribe of natives passed there within
a few days? No, for an object struck Glenarvan's eye, which proved
incontestably that the convicts had visited that part of the coast.

"You see, John," said Glenarvan, "the convicts have been here! And our
poor comrades of the Duncan----"

"The wretches!" cried Glenarvan. "If they ever fall into my hands, I
will avenge my crew!"

Grief and exposure had hardened Glenarvan's features. For several
moments he gazed at the vast expanse of water, seeking perhaps to
discern some ship in the dim distance. Then his eyes relaxed their
fierceness, he regained his composure, and, without adding a word or
making a sign, took the road to Eden.

Having accomplished his object, Glenarvan returned to the Victoria
Hotel. The travelers passed this last evening in Australia in sadness.
Their thoughts wandered over this country, so fertile in misfortunes.
They recalled the hopes they had reasonably conceived at Cape
Bernouilli, now so cruelly disappointed at Twofold Bay.

Of all the passengers, the one most to be pitied was Lord Glenarvan.
They rarely saw him below; he could not keep still. His nervous and
excitable nature would not submit to an imprisonment between four
wooden walls. Day and night, heedless of the torrents of rain and the
dashing spray of the sea, he remained on deck, sometimes bending over
the rail, sometimes pacing up and down with feverish agitation. His
eyes gazed continually into space, and, during the brief lulls, his
glass persistently surveyed the horizon. He seemed to question the mute
waves; the mist that veiled the sky, the masses of vapor, he would have
penetrated with a glance; he could not be resigned, and his countenance
betokened an acute grief. The power and hopefulness of this man,
hitherto so energetic and courageous, had suddenly failed.

Captain Mangles seldom left him, but at his side endured the severity
of the storm. That day, Glenarvan, wherever there was an opening in
the mist, scanned the horizon with the utmost persistency. The young
captain approached him.

Glenarvan did not answer. He still gazed, and for a moment his glass
was pointed towards the horizon to windward of the vessel.

"Why, John?" replied Glenarvan. "It is not the land that I am seeking."

"Poor women!" murmured Glenarvan. "John, my heart is broken, and
sometimes I feel as if despair had invaded it. It seems to me as if
new calamities awaited us, as if Heaven had decreed against us! I am
afraid!"

Captain Halley summoned his men, with many oaths, and ordered them to
reef the top-sails. Captain Mangles approved in silence. He had given
up remonstrating with this coarse seaman; but neither he nor Glenarvan
left the deck.

"The truth, John?" asked Glenarvan, faintly.

While he was thinking thus, and longing for a little light in the
gloomy sky, the ladies, relying upon his words, were reposing in their
berths. The steadiness of the brig secured them several hours of rest.
Glenarvan and the others, no longer hearing the cries of the drunken
crew, refreshed themselves also by a hasty sleep, and, early in the
morning, deep silence reigned on board this vessel, which had sunk to
rest, as it were, upon her bed of sand.

"Where is that Halley?" asked Glenarvan.

"Let us search for them," said Glenarvan; "we cannot abandon them on
this vessel."

"I agree with you," replied Glenarvan. "Besides, there is a better
captain on board, yourself, and courageous seamen, your companions.
Command us; we are ready to obey you."

All endorsed Glenarvan's words, and, ranged along the deck, they stood
ready for the young captain's orders.

"What is to be done?" asked Glenarvan.

"If the vessel can be raised, let us raise it," replied Glenarvan.
"That is the best plan, is it not?"

Glenarvan, the captain, and Mulready opened the main scuttle, and went
down into the hold. About two hundred tons of tanned hides were there,
very badly stowed away; but they could draw them aside without much
difficulty, by means of the main-stay tackling, and they at once threw
overboard part of this ballast so as to lighten the ship.

Glenarvan was familiar enough with the sea to understand the necessity
of these arrangements. One anchor was to be cast to prevent the ship
from stranding at low water.

This labor was half accomplished when the sun neared the meridian.
The captain left Glenarvan to follow out his instructions, and turned
his attention to determining his position, which was very important.
Fortunately, he had found in Will Halley's cabin a Nautical Almanac and
a sextant, with which he was able to take an observation. By consulting
the map Paganel had bought at Eden, he saw that they had been wrecked
at the mouth of Aotea Bay, above Cahua Point, on the shores of the
province of Auckland. As the city was on the thirty-seventh parallel,
the Macquarie had been carried a considerable distance out of her
course. It was, therefore, necessary to sail northward to reach the
capital of New Zealand.

"A journey of not more than twenty-five miles," said Glenarvan. "It is
nothing."

But at this hour the breeze subsided, and only a few capricious
ripples stirred the surface of the water. Looking towards the horizon,
the captain observed that the wind was changing from southwest to
northwest. A sailor could not be mistaken in the peculiar arrangement
and color of the clouds. He accordingly informed Glenarvan of these
indications, and proposed to defer their work till the next day.

These reasons were decisive. Glenarvan and Paganel, the most impatient
on board, yielded, and the work was suspended.

Glenarvan, Mulready, and Robert on one side, and Paganel, the major,
and Olbinett on the other, bore down upon the handles that moved the
machine. At the same time the captain and Wilson added their efforts to
those of their companions.

"What do you mean, Paganel?" said Glenarvan. "The raft will take us
ashore."

"What have we to fear in New Zealand?" asked Glenarvan.

"The savages?" said Glenarvan. "Can we not avoid them by following the
coast? Besides, an attack from a few wretches cannot intimidate ten
well-armed and determined Europeans."

"Never fear, my boy!" said Glenarvan; "our friend Paganel exaggerates."

"When shall we start?" asked Glenarvan.

"No," replied Glenarvan; "no fragment could have drifted so far from
the ship."

"The brig's boat?" said Glenarvan.

"But this boat may be useful," said Glenarvan.

"As you wish, John," said Glenarvan.

Quite a heavy swell agitated the surface of the water, and seemed to
set steadily towards the shore. Glenarvan, therefore, when he learned
that the whole night would be passed on board, asked why they did not
take advantage of this current to approach the coast.

Just at this moment a shock was felt. The raft stopped. They had
stranded on a sand-bar, not far from the coast. Glenarvan, Robert,
Wilson, and Mulready leaped into the water, and moored their bark
firmly with cables on the adjoining reefs. The ladies were carried in
their companions' arms, and reached the shore without wetting a single
fold of their garments; and soon all, with arms and provisions, had set
foot on the inhospitable shores of New Zealand.

Glenarvan, without losing an hour, would have followed the coast to
Auckland; but since early morning the sky had been heavy with clouds,
which, towards noon, descended in torrents of rain. Hence it was
impossible to start on their journey, and advisable to seek a shelter.

Paganel assured them that these sea-elephants were only weighting
themselves preparatory to their descent into the water, and protested
that if they would but wait for a time they might see them descend and
subsequently return when they had unloaded themselves. The first part
of this programme they saw accomplished; but, greatly to Paganel's
grief, Glenarvan would not longer delay the party, and they soon began
to see inland beauties and curiosities of another sort.

"Then," said Glenarvan, "we shall be compelled to encamp again
to-night."

"Always your fears, Paganel!" said Glenarvan.

Glenarvan and his friends hastened their pace. They knew the shortness
of the twilight in this latitude, and how quickly night sets in. It
was important to reach the junction of the two rivers before it became
dark. But a dense fog rose from the earth, and made it very difficult
to distinguish the way.

In the centre of this long canoe, with feet tied, but hands free, were
ten European prisoners clinging closely to each other. They were Lord
Glenarvan and his companions.

This terrible catastrophe had come upon Glenarvan just as he was
about reaching the long-desired harbor of Auckland, whence he would
have returned to his native country. Yet, looking at his calm and
passionless countenance, you could not have divined the depth of his
anguish, for in his present critical situation he did not betray the
extent of his misfortunes. He felt that he ought to set an example of
fortitude to his wife and his companions, as being the husband and
chief. Moreover, he was ready to die first for the common safety, if
circumstances should require it.

His companions were worthy of him; they shared his noble thoughts, and
their calm and haughty appearance would scarcely have intimated that
they were being carried away to captivity and suffering. By common
consent, at Glenarvan's suggestion, they had resolved to feign a proud
indifference in the presence of the savages. It was the only way of
influencing those fierce natures.

Since leaving the encampment, the natives, taciturn like all savages,
had scarcely spoken to each other. However, from a few words exchanged,
Glenarvan perceived that they were acquainted with the English
language. He therefore resolved to question the chief in regard to the
fate that was in store for them. Addressing Kai-Koumou, he said, in a
fearless tone:

"Say, what do you expect to do with us?" continued Glenarvan.

Glenarvan asked no more, but hope returned to his heart. Doubtless,
some chiefs of the Maori tribe had fallen into the hands of the
English, and the natives would attempt to recover them by way of
exchange; their situation, therefore, was not one for despair.

Meantime the canoe rapidly ascended the river. Paganel, whose
changeable disposition carried him from one extreme to another, had
regained his hopefulness. He believed that the Maoris were sparing them
the fatigue of their journey to the English settlements, and that they
were certain to arrive at their destination. He was, therefore, quite
resigned to his lot, and traced on his map the course of the Waikato
across the plains and valleys of the province. Lady Helena and Mary
Grant, suppressing their terror, conversed in low tones with Glenarvan,
and the most skillful physiognomist could not have detected on their
faces the anxiety of their hearts.

"But whereabouts are the English garrisons?" asked Glenarvan.

Glenarvan cast a sorrowful glance at his young wife and Mary Grant,
exposed to the mercy of these fierce natives, and captives in a wild
country, far from all human assistance. But he saw that he was watched
by Kai-Koumou, and, not wishing to show that one of the captives was
his wife, he prudently kept his thoughts to himself, and gazed at the
banks of the river with apparent indifference.

Before Kai-Koumou had informed his captives of his intention to
exchange them, Glenarvan and Captain Mangles had discussed various
methods of recovering their liberty. What they could not venture in the
boat they hoped to attempt on land, at the hour for encamping, under
cover of the night.

But since Glenarvan's conversation with the chief, it seemed wise to
abandon this design. They must be patient. It was the most prudent
plan. The exchange offered chances that neither an open attack nor a
flight across these unknown regions could afford. Many circumstances
might indeed arise that would delay, and even prevent, such a
transaction; but still it was better to await the result. What,
moreover, could ten defenceless men do against thirty well-armed
savages? Besides, Glenarvan thought it likely that Kai-Koumou's tribe
had lost some chief of high rank whom they were particularly anxious to
recover; and he was not mistaken.

A quarter of a mile distant, on a buttress of the mountain, appeared
a "pah," a Maori fortification, situated in an impregnable position.
The prisoners were taken ashore, with their hands and feet free, and
conducted thither by the warriors. After quite a long détour, Glenarvan
and his companions reached the pah.

Glenarvan and his companions had taken in the whole at a glance. They
awaited beside an empty hut the good pleasure of the chief, exposed to
the insults of a crowd of old women, who surrounded them like harpies,
and threatened them with their fists, crying and howling. Several
English words that passed their lips clearly indicated that they were
demanding immediate vengeance.

Glenarvan, wishing to relieve Lady Helena from the assaults of these
shrews, boldly approached Kai-Koumou, and, pointing to the hideous
throng, said:

The Maori chief gazed steadily at his prisoner without replying. Then
with a gesture he silenced the noisy horde. Glenarvan bowed in token of
thanks, and slowly resumed his place among his friends.

Here the prisoners, temporarily sheltered from the fury of the natives,
stretched themselves on the flax mats. Lady Helena, her strength
exhausted and her energy overcome, sank into her husband's arms.
Glenarvan pressed her to his breast, and said:

"Get down, Robert," said Glenarvan.

"Edward," said she, in a firm voice, "neither Mary Grant nor I shall
fall alive into the hands of those savages!"

"A weapon!" exclaimed Glenarvan, whose eyes suddenly brightened.

"Yes. The Maoris do not search their female prisoners; but this weapon
is for us, Edward, not for them."

"Glenarvan," said MacNabb quickly, "hide the revolver. It is not time
yet."

The weapon was immediately concealed in his clothes. The mat that
closed the entrance of the hut was raised. A native appeared. He made a
sign to the captives to follow him. Glenarvan and his companions passed
through the pah, and stopped before Kai-Koumou.

"Yes," replied Glenarvan, without hesitation, for this nationality
would probably facilitate an exchange.

"They have done wrong," said Glenarvan, in a grave tone. "I say so
because I think so, and not because I am in your power."

Glenarvan hesitated, and watched the Maori chief very attentively.

"No," answered Glenarvan. "I am neither a chief nor a priest among my
people."

Paganel was astounded at this reply, and gazed at Glenarvan in profound
wonder. Kai-Koumou seemed equally surprised.

"I do not know," repeated Glenarvan.

"Not me alone," replied Glenarvan; "but perhaps all of us."

"Offer these ladies first in exchange for your priest," answered
Glenarvan, pointing to Lady Helena and Mary Grant. Lady Helena would
have rushed towards her husband, but the major restrained her.

"These two ladies," continued Glenarvan, turning respectfully towards
them, "hold a high rank in their country."

"Edward!" cried the unfortunate woman, in terror.

Glenarvan, without uttering a word, raised his arm. A report resounded.
Kara-Tété fell dead.

At this sound a crowd of natives issued from the huts. The pah was
filled in an instant. A hundred arms were raised against the captives.
Glenarvan's revolver was snatched from his hand.

Kai-Koumou cast a strange look at Glenarvan, and then, guarding with
one hand the person of him who had fired, he controlled with the other
the throng that was rushing upon the Europeans.

At this word the crowd fell back before Glenarvan and his companions,
thus temporarily preserved by a supernatural power. A few moments after
they were led back to the temple that served as their prison; but
Robert Grant and Paganel were no longer with them.

Glenarvan, however, was not blind to the fate that was reserved for
him. Only his death could atone for the murder of a chief. Among savage
races death is always preceded by a protracted torture. He therefore
expected to cruelly expiate the righteous indignation that had nerved
his arm, but hoped that Kai-Koumou's rage would fall only on himself.

What a night he and his companions passed! Who could depict their
anguish, or measure their sufferings? Neither poor Robert nor brave
Paganel had reappeared. But how could they doubt their fate? Were they
not the first victims of the natives' vengeance? All hope had vanished
even from the heart of the major, who did not easily despair. John
Mangles felt himself growing mad at sight of the sad dejection of Mary
Grant, thus separated from her brother. Glenarvan thought of that
terrible request of Lady Helena, who, rather than yield to torture or
slavery, preferred to die by his hand. Could he summon this fearful
courage? As for an escape, that was plainly impossible. Ten warriors,
armed to the teeth, guarded the entrance of the temple.

However, although Glenarvan concluded that Kai-Koumou must have
abandoned all idea of exchange, the major on this point retained a
gleam of hope.

"Who knows," said he, reminding Glenarvan of the effect produced upon
the chief by the death of Kara-Tété,--"who knows but that Kai-Koumou in
reality feels obliged to you?"

But, in spite of these observations, Glenarvan would no longer hope.
The next day also passed away without the preparations for torture
being made. The reason of the delay was this.

Glenarvan clasped his wife to his heart. At this moment Mary Grant
approached John Mangles.

"Lord and Lady Glenarvan," said she, "I think that, if a wife can die
by the hand of her husband to escape a degrading existence, a maiden
can likewise die by the hand of her lover. John (for I may tell you
at this critical moment), have I not long been your betrothed in the
depths of your heart? May I rely upon you, dear John, as Lady Helena
does upon Lord Glenarvan?"

"You killed Kara-Tété!" said he to Glenarvan.

"Alone?" inquired Glenarvan, whose heart beat quickly.

At this moment a commotion took place among the natives. Glenarvan cast
a rapid glance around him. The crowd opened, and a warrior, dripping
with sweat and overcome with fatigue, appeared.

The fate of Glenarvan and his companions was settled.

Glenarvan and his companions, breathless with fright, strove to hide
this awful scene from the eyes of the two unhappy ladies. They now
understood what awaited them at sunrise the next day, and what cruel
tortures would doubtless precede such a death. They were dumb with
horror.

"We shall need all the strength possible to face death," said
Glenarvan. "We must show these barbarians how Europeans and Christians
can die."

Glenarvan, taking his friends aside, said:

Glenarvan's voice, hitherto firm, now faltered. He paused to control
his emotion. After a moment's silence, he said to the young captain:

"I do not speak for ourselves," replied Glenarvan. "We can brave
death, whatever it may be. Ah, if we were alone! Twenty times already
would I have urged you to make a sally and attack those wretches. But
_they_----"

This hut was built against the rock that terminated the fortification,
and was only accessible by a narrow passage that connected it with the
front of the pah. The other two sides of the building were flanked
by towering precipices, and stood on the verge of an abyss a hundred
feet deep. A descent this way was therefore impossible. There was no
chance of escaping in the rear, which was guarded by the enormous rock.
The only exit was the door of the temple, and the Maoris defended the
narrow passage that connected it with the pah. All escape was therefore
out of the question; and Glenarvan, after examining the walls of his
prison, was forced to acknowledge this disheartening fact.

When he was certain of this fact, he passed quietly towards Glenarvan
and the captain, and led them to the rear of the hut.

Glenarvan, with bewildered gaze, stood astonished.

"Is it Robert?" murmured Glenarvan.

But, though only whispering this name, Mary Grant, awakened by the
movement that was taking place in the hut, glided towards Glenarvan,
and, seizing this hand all soiled with mud, covered it with kisses.

"Is Paganel below?" inquired Glenarvan.

"What! have you not seen him?" exclaimed Glenarvan. "Did you not meet
each other in the confusion? Did you not escape together?"

"This rope," said he, "can only bear the weight of two bodies, and we
must therefore act accordingly. Let Lord and Lady Glenarvan slide down
first. When they have reached the bottom, three shakes at the rope will
be the signal to follow them."

"Go then, my boy," said Glenarvan, clasping the boy's hand.

Glenarvan and Lady Helena now ventured out of the grotto. The
darkness below was still profound, but the gray light of dawn was
already tinging the top of the mountain. The keen cold of the morning
reanimated the young wife; she felt stronger, and commenced her
perilous escape.

First her husband, and then she, slid down the rope to the point where
the perpendicular wall met the summit of the slope. Then Glenarvan,
going before his wife and assisting her, began to descend the
declivity of the mountain backwards. He sought for tufts of grass and
bushes that offered a point of support, and tried them before placing
Lady Helena's feet upon them. Several birds, suddenly awakened, flew
away with shrill cries, and the fugitives shuddered when a large stone
rolled noisily to the base of the mountain.

Glenarvan, clinging with one hand to a tuft of grass and holding his
wife with the other, waited, scarcely breathing.

Wilson had taken alarm. Hearing some noise outside, he had returned to
the hut, and, raising the mat, watched the Maoris. At a sign from him
the captain had stopped Glenarvan.

The captain made a sign to Glenarvan to continue his descent. The
latter, accordingly, slid gently down the slope, and soon Lady Helena
and he stood on the narrow path where Robert was waiting for them. The
rope was shaken three times, and next Captain Mangles, followed by Mary
Grant, took the same perilous course. They were successful, and joined
Lord and Lady Glenarvan.

Before this dreaded moment arrived it was important that the fugitives
should be beyond the reach of the savages. But they could not advance
quickly, for the paths were steep. Lady Helena scaled the declivities,
supported and even carried by Glenarvan, while Mary Grant leaned upon
the arm of her betrothed. Robert, happy and triumphant, whose heart was
full of joy at his success, took the lead, followed by the two sailors.

For half an hour the fugitives wandered at a venture. Paganel was not
there to guide them,--Paganel, the object of their fears, whose absence
cast a dark shadow over their happiness. However, they proceeded
towards the east as well as possible, in the face of a magnificent
dawn. They had soon reached an elevation of five hundred feet above
Lake Taupo, and the morning air at this altitude was keen and cold.
Hills and mountains rose one above another in indistinct outlines; but
Glenarvan only wished to conceal himself and his companions. Afterwards
they would see about issuing from this winding labyrinth.

At last the sun appeared and flashed his first rays into the faces of
the fugitives. Suddenly a terrible yelling, the concentrated union of a
hundred voices, broke forth upon the air. It rose from the pah, whose
exact position Glenarvan did not now know. Moreover, a thick curtain of
mist stretched at their feet, and prevented them from distinguishing
the valleys below.

"Courage, courage, my friends!" cried Glenarvan, urging his companions
with word and gesture.

Glenarvan cast an anxious glance around him. The mist had dissolved
under the rays of the sun, and his eye could clearly distinguish the
least depressions of the earth. No movement of the Maoris could escape
his sight.

The natives were not five hundred feet distant, when they reached the
plateau upon which the solitary peak rested. Glenarvan could not, for
ever so short a time, delay longer. At all hazards they must fly, at
the risk of being hemmed in on all sides.

"It is useless, Glenarvan. Look!"

"Are you in earnest?" asked Glenarvan.

Robert was right. Fifty feet above, at the extreme point of the
mountain, stood a small palisaded inclosure of freshly-painted stakes.
Glenarvan, likewise, recognized the sepulchre of the Maori chief. In
their wanderings they had come to the top of the Maunganamu, where
Kara-Tété had been buried.

Followed by his companions, he climbed the sides of the peak, to the
very foot of the tomb. A large opening, covered with mats, formed the
entrance. Glenarvan was about to enter, when, all at once, he started
back suddenly.

Glenarvan, the major, Robert, and Captain Mangles passed into the
inclosure. A Maori was there, clad in a great flax mantle. The darkness
of the sepulchre did not permit them to distinguish his features. He
appeared very calm, and was eating his breakfast with the most perfect
indifference.

Glenarvan was about to address him, when the native, anticipating him,
said, in an amiable tone, and in excellent English:

It was Paganel. At his voice all rushed into the tomb, and gazed with
wonder at the worthy geographer. Paganel was found! The common safety
was represented in him. They were going to question him: they wished
to know how and why he was on the top of the mountain; but Glenarvan
checked this unseasonable curiosity.

The safety of the fugitives was not yet certain, but there was a
salutary respite, of which they strove to take advantage. Glenarvan, a
prey to unspeakable emotion, did not venture a word; while the major
nodded his head with an air of genuine satisfaction.

"We will escape!" said Glenarvan; "but how?"

Their situation was still exceedingly critical. The natives, if they
did not venture to climb the mountain, expected that hunger and thirst
would force their prisoners to surrender. It was only a matter of time,
and the savages had great patience. Glenarvan did not disregard the
difficulties of his position, but waited for the favorable issue which
Providence seemed to promise.

Glenarvan and his friends, as soon as they ventured on the dangerous
part of the ridge, were saluted with a volley of shots; but only a
few wads, borne by the wind, reached them. They were made of printed
paper. Paganel picked them up out of curiosity, but it was difficult to
decipher them.

"And what passage of the Scriptures have these natives fired at us?"
asked Glenarvan.

"My friends," said Glenarvan, "we must make known the words of hope to
our brave and dear ladies. Here is something to reanimate their hearts."

Glenarvan and his companions ascended the steep paths of the peak, and
proceeded towards the tomb, which they wished to examine. On the way
they were astonished to feel, at short intervals, a certain trembling
of the ground. It was not an irregular agitation, but that continued
vibration which the sides of a boiler undergo when it is fully charged.
Steam, in large quantities, generated by the action of subterranean
fires, seemed to be working beneath the crust of the mountain.

"And yet," said Glenarvan, "we seem to be in no more danger here than
beside the boiler of the Duncan. This crust is firm."

Lady Helena, who perceived Lord Glenarvan, now approached.

"My dear Edward," said she, "you have considered our position! Are we
to hope or fear?"

"Hope, my dear Helena," replied Glenarvan. "The natives will never come
to the top of the mountain, and we shall have abundant time to form a
plan of escape."

"Doubtless," replied Glenarvan; "it is a very foolish custom to make
presents of fire-arms to the savages, who then use them against the
invaders, and with reason. At all events, these guns will be useful to
us."

The fugitives were, therefore, fortified for several days against
hunger and thirst, and they needed no urging to take their first meal
at the chief's expense. Glenarvan directed Mr. Olbinett's attention
to the food necessary for his companions; but he, with his usual
exactness, even in critical situations, thought the bill of fare rather
scanty. Moreover, he did not know how to prepare the roots, and there
was no fire.

Their hunger being satiated, Glenarvan proposed that they should,
without delay, arrange a plan of escape.

"I think, first of all," replied Glenarvan, "that we ought to attempt
an escape before we are forced to it by hunger. We have strength enough
yet, and must take advantage of it. To-night let us try to gain the
eastern valleys, and cross the circle of natives under cover of the
darkness."

At nine o'clock it was very dark, and Glenarvan and Captain Mangles
resolved to make an exploration before taking their companions on
this perilous journey. They noiselessly descended the declivity some
distance, and reached the narrow ridge that crossed the line of natives
fifty feet above the encampment.

"Back!" cried Glenarvan; "these bandits have eyes like a cat, and the
guns of riflemen!"

Captain Mangles and he reascended at once the precipitous slopes of the
mountain, and speedily assured their terrified friends of their safety.
Glenarvan's hat had been pierced by two bullets. It was, therefore,
dangerous to venture on the ridge between these two lines of marksmen.

"This plan is really well conceived," remarked Glenarvan. "There is
only one chance against it, and that is, that the savages may persist
in remaining at the foot of the mountain till the provisions fail
us. But this is scarcely probable, especially if we play our part
skillfully."

At eight o'clock the summit of the mountain was hidden by a foreboding
darkness, while the sky looked terribly black, as if for a background
to the flaming outbreak that Paganel was about to inaugurate. The
Maoris could no longer see their prisoners. The time for action had
come. Rapidity was necessary, and Glenarvan, Paganel, MacNabb, Robert,
the steward, and the two sailors at once set to work vigorously.

Glenarvan and his companions had scarcely time to escape the shock of
the eruption. They fled to the inclosure of the tomb, but not without
receiving a few scalding drops of the water, which bubbled and exhaled
a strong sulphureous odor.

All night long, during the storm that raged above and below, the peak
was shaken with a commotion that could not but alarm Glenarvan. The
prisoners, concealed behind the palisade of the tomb, watched the
fearful progress of the outbreak.

Morning came. The fury of the volcano had not moderated. Thick,
yellowish vapors mingled with the flames, and torrents of lava poured
in every direction. Glenarvan, with eye alert and beating heart,
glanced between the interstices of the inclosure, and surveyed the camp
of the Maoris.

Kai-Koumou came into the midst of his warriors, and Glenarvan
recognized him. The chief advanced to the base of the peak, on the side
spared by the eruption, but did not cross the first slopes. Here, with
outstretched arms, like a sorcerer exorcising, he made a few grimaces,
the meaning of which did not escape the prisoners. As Paganel had
foreseen, Kai-Koumou was invoking upon the mountain a more rigorous
taboo.

"They are going!" cried Glenarvan. "They are abandoning their post!
God be thanked! Our scheme has succeeded! My dear Helena, my brave
companions, we are now dead and buried; but this evening we will
revive, we will leave our tomb, and flee from these barbarous tribes!"

At nine o'clock it was dark night, and Glenarvan gave the signal for
departure. His companions and he, armed and equipped at Kara-Tété's
expense, began to cautiously descend the slopes of the Maunganamu.
Captain Mangles and Wilson led the way, with eyes and ears on the
alert. They stopped at the least sound,--they examined the faintest
light; each slid down the declivity, the better to elude detection.

Two hundred feet below the summit, Captain Mangles and his sailor
reached the dangerous ridge that had been so obstinately guarded by the
natives. If, unfortunately, the Maoris, more crafty than the fugitives,
had feigned a retreat to entice them within reach, if they had not
been deceived by the eruption, their presence would be discovered
at this point. Glenarvan, in spite of his confidence and Paganel's
pleasantries, could not help trembling. The safety of his friends was
at stake during the few moments necessary to cross the ridge. He felt
Lady Helena's heart beat as she clung to his arm.

The travelers crossed this place without accident, and began the
ascent in silence. The thicket was invisible, but they knew where it
was, and, provided no ambuscade was laid there, Glenarvan hoped to
find a secure refuge. However, he remembered that they were now no
longer protected by the taboo. The ascending ridge did not belong to
the sacred mountain, but to a chain that ran along the eastern shores
of Lake Taupo. Therefore not only the shots of the savages, but also a
hand-to-hand conflict, were to be feared.

However, they still conversed together, but no longer in common. The
little party was divided into groups, not by any narrow prejudice or
ill feeling, but to some extent from sadness. Often Glenarvan was
alone, thinking, as he approached the coast, of the Duncan and her
crew. He forgot the dangers that still threatened him, in his grief for
his lost sailors and the terrible visions that continually haunted his
mind.

When he did speak of Captain Grant, he began to lay plans for a further
search. He declared to Mary that Lord Glenarvan would resume this
undertaking, hitherto so unsuccessful.

Glenarvan and his companions, after many vicissitudes, reached the foot
of Mount Ikirangi, whose peak towered five thousand feet aloft. They
had now traveled almost one hundred miles since leaving the Maunganamu,
and the coast was still thirty miles distant. Captain Mangles had
hoped to make the journey in ten days, but he was ignorant then of
the difficulties of the way. There were still two good days of travel
before they could gain the ocean, and renewed activity and extreme
vigilance became necessary, for they were entering a region frequented
by the natives. However, each conquered the fatigue, and the little
party continued their course.

Between Mount Ikirangi, some distance on their right, and Mount Hardy,
whose summit rose to the left, was a large plain, thickly overspread
with twining plants and underbrush. Progress here was tedious and
difficult in the extreme; for the pliant tendrils wound a score of
folds about their bodies like serpents. Hunting was impossible; the
provisions were nearly exhausted, and could not be renewed, and water
failed, so that they could not allay their thirst, rendered doubly
acute by their fatigue. The sufferings of Glenarvan and his friends
were terrible, and for the first time their moral energy now almost
forsook them.

They were walking along the coast, when, at no great distance, a number
of natives appeared, who rushed towards the little party, brandishing
their weapons. Glenarvan, shut in by the sea, saw that escape was
impossible, and, summoning all his strength, was about to make
preparations for battle, when Captain Mangles cried:

What was Glenarvan doing? Standing at the stern of the canoe, he looked
around as if for some expected aid. What did he expect? What did he
wish? Had he a presentiment?

The fugitives displayed new energy, and for several moments longer they
kept their distance. The steamer grew more and more distinct. They
could clearly discern her masts, and the thick clouds of black smoke
that issued from her smoke-stack. Glenarvan, giving the helm to Robert,
had seized the geographer's glass, and did not lose a single movement
of the vessel.

"The Duncan!" cried Glenarvan,--"the Duncan and the convicts!"

"Yes, death on all sides!" moaned Glenarvan, overcome by so many
calamities.

The feelings of Glenarvan and his friends, when the songs of old
Scotland resounded in their ears, it is impossible to describe. As soon
as they set foot on deck the bagpiper struck up a well remembered air,
while hearty hurrahs welcomed the owner's return on board. Glenarvan,
John Mangles, Paganel, Robert, and even the major, wept and embraced
each other. Their emotions rose from joy to ecstasy. The geographer was
fairly wild, skipping about and watching with his inseparable telescope
the canoes returning to shore.

But at sight of Glenarvan and his companions, with tattered garments,
emaciated features, and the traces of extreme suffering, the crew
ceased their lively demonstrations. These were spectres, not the bold
and dashing travelers whom, three months before, hope had stimulated to
a search for the shipwrecked captain. Chance alone had led them back to
this vessel that they had ceased to regard as theirs, and in what a sad
state of exhaustion and feebleness!

However, before thinking of fatigue, or the imperative calls of hunger
and thirst, Glenarvan questioned Tom Austin concerning his presence in
these waters. Why was the Duncan on the eastern coast of New Zealand?
Why was she not in the hands of Ben Joyce? By what providential working
had God restored her to the fugitives? These were the questions that
were hurriedly addressed to Tom Austin. The old sailor did not know
which to answer first. He therefore concluded to listen only to Lord
Glenarvan, and reply to him.

"But the convicts?" inquired Glenarvan. "What have you done with the
convicts?"

"Never?" cried Glenarvan, amazed at the answers of the old sailor.
"Then will you tell me why the Duncan is now on the shores of New
Zealand?"

Although Glenarvan and his friends did not at all understand Austin's
astonishment, what was their surprise when he replied, in a calm voice:

"By my orders?" cried Glenarvan.

"Well," continued Glenarvan, "let us have an explanation; for I almost
think I am dreaming. You received a letter, Tom?"

"Australia!" cried Glenarvan, with an impetuosity that disconcerted the
old sailor.

"Australia, Tom! Australia!" replied Glenarvan's companions, with one
voice.

Austin was now bewildered. Glenarvan spoke with such assurance, that
he feared he had made a mistake in reading the letter. Could he,
faithful and accurate sailor that he was, have committed such a
blunder? He began to feel troubled.

At this moment Austin returned. He held in his hand the letter written
by Paganel, and signed by Glenarvan.

Glenarvan took the letter, and read:

He snatched the letter from Glenarvan's hands, rubbed his eyes,
adjusted his spectacles to his nose, and read in his turn.

"Now, Paganel," said Glenarvan, "be candid. I acknowledge that your
absent-mindedness has been providential. To be sure, without you the
Duncan would have fallen into the hands of the convicts; without you we
should have been recaptured by the Maoris. But do tell me, what strange
association of ideas, what unnatural aberration, induced you to write
New Zealand instead of Australia?"

"Never mind, my dear Glenarvan. I am a madman, a fool, an incorrigible
being, and shall die a most famous blunderer!"

However, leaving Lady Helena, Mary Grant, the major, Paganel, and
Robert to enter the saloon, Glenarvan and Captain Mangles retained Tom
Austin with them. They wished to question him further.

"Now, Tom," said Glenarvan, "let me know: did not this order to sail
for the coast of New Zealand seem strange to you?"

"But what did you think?" asked Glenarvan.

"What do you mean, Tom?" inquired Glenarvan.

"Ayrton!" cried Glenarvan. "Is he on board?"

"Ayrton here!" repeated Glenarvan, glancing at Captain Mangles.

In an instant, with the swiftness of lightning, Ayrton's conduct, his
long-contrived treachery, Glenarvan's wound, the attack upon Mulready,
their sufferings in the marshes of the Snowy, all the wretch's deeds,
flashed upon the minds of the two men. And now, by a strange fatality,
the convict was in their power.

"Where is he?" asked Glenarvan quickly.

At this moment Glenarvan and Captain Mangles were summoned to the
saloon. Breakfast, which they so much needed, was ready. They took
seats at the table, but did not speak of Ayrton.

However, when the meal was ended, and the passengers had assembled on
deck, Glenarvan informed them of the quartermaster's presence on board.
At the same time he declared his intention of sending for him.

"Can I be released from attending this tribunal?" asked Lady Helena.
"I confess to you, my dear Edward, that the sight of this unfortunate
would be very painful to me."

"It is only to confront him, Helena," replied Glenarvan. "Remain,
if you can. Ben Joyce should see himself face to face with all his
intended victims."

Ayrton soon made his appearance. He crossed the deck with a confident
step, and ascended the poop-stairs. His eyes had a sullen look, his
teeth were set, and his fists clinched convulsively. His bearing
displayed neither exultation nor humility. As soon as he was in Lord
Glenarvan's presence, he folded his arms, and calmly and silently
waited to be questioned:

"Ayrton," said Glenarvan, "here we all are, as you see, on board the
Duncan, that you would have surrendered to Ben Joyce's accomplices."

However, he made no reply. Glenarvan waited patiently, but Ayrton still
persisted in maintaining an obstinate silence.

"Speak, Ayrton; what have you to say?" continued Glenarvan.

But Glenarvan had resolved to be patient. A powerful motive urged
him to ascertain certain circumstances of Ayrton's mysterious life,
especially as regarded Harry Grant and the Britannia. He therefore
resumed his inquiries, speaking with extreme mildness, and imposing the
most perfect calmness upon the violent agitation of his heart.

Ayrton remained unmoved, watching the coast, deaf to every question.
Glenarvan, whose eye flashed with some inward emotion, continued to
question him.

"Listen to me, Ayrton," resumed Glenarvan. "It is for your interest to
speak. We may reward a frank confession, which is your only resort. For
the last time, will you answer my questions?"

Ayrton turned his head towards Glenarvan, and looked him full in the
face.

"The proofs will be easy," replied Glenarvan.

Ayrton had grown animated while speaking, but soon relapsed into his
former indifference. He doubtless imagined that this declaration would
end the examination: but Glenarvan resumed, and said:

"Will you tell me where Captain Grant is?" asked Glenarvan.

"Ayrton," said Glenarvan, in almost a suppliant tone, "will you, at
least, if you know where Captain Grant is, tell his poor children, who
are only waiting for a word from your lips?"

"Hang, then!" cried Glenarvan, overcome by a sudden feeling of
indignation.

Since Glenarvan had failed to overcome Ayrton's obstinacy, what was
to be done? Evidently to follow the plan formed at Eden, of returning
to England, and resuming hereafter this unsuccessful enterprise, for
all traces of the Britannia now seemed irrevocably lost. The document
admitted of no new interpretation. There was no other country on the
line of the thirty-seventh parallel, and the only way was to sail for
home.

He consulted his friends, and more especially Captain Mangles, on the
subject of return. The captain examined his store-rooms. The supply
of coal would not last more than fifteen days. It was, therefore,
necessary to replenish the fuel at the first port. He accordingly
proposed to Glenarvan to sail for Talcahuana Bay, where the Duncan had
already procured supplies before undertaking her voyage. This was a
direct passage. Then the yacht, with ample provisions, could double
Cape Horn, and reach Scotland by way of the Atlantic.

It was a sad return for these brave searchers, who had left the shores
of Scotland with such hope and confidence. To the joyous cries that
had saluted Glenarvan on his return succeeded profound dejection. Each
confined himself to the solitude of his cabin, and rarely appeared on
deck. All, even the loquacious Paganel, were mournful and silent. If
Glenarvan spoke of beginning his search again, the geographer shook
his head like a man who has no more hope, for he seemed convinced as
to the fate of the shipwrecked sailors. Yet there was one man on board
who could have informed them about this catastrophe, but whose silence
was still prolonged. There was no doubt that the rascally Ayrton knew,
if not the actual situation of the captain, at least the place of the
shipwreck. Probably Harry Grant, if found, would be a witness against
him; hence he persisted in his silence, and was greatly enraged,
especially towards the sailors who would accuse him of an evil design.

Several times Glenarvan renewed his attempts with the quartermaster.
Promises and threats were useless. Ayrton's obstinacy was carried
so far, and was so inexplicable, that the major came to the belief
that he knew nothing; which opinion was shared by the geographer and
corroborated his own ideas in regard to Captain Grant.

Lady Helena, seeing her husband's failures, now suggested an attempt,
in her turn, to persuade the quartermaster. Where a man had failed,
perhaps a woman could succeed by her gentle entreaty. Glenarvan,
knowing the tact of his young wife, gave his hearty approval. Ayrton
was, accordingly, brought to Lady Helena's boudoir. Mary Grant was to
be present at the interview, for the young girl's influence might also
be great, and Lady Helena would not neglect any chance of success.

For two long hours this kind and gentle Scotch lady remained alone face
to face with the chief of the convicts. Glenarvan, a prey to nervous
agitation, lingered near the cabin, now determined to thoroughly
exhaust the chances of success, and now upon the point of drawing his
wife away from this painful and prolonged interview.

"Has he spoken?" asked Lord Glenarvan of his wife.

Lady Helena retired to her cabin, accompanied by Mary Grant, and the
quartermaster was taken to the saloon where Glenarvan awaited him.

As soon as the quartermaster was in Lord Glenarvan's presence his
custodians retired.

"You desired to speak to me, Ayrton?" said Glenarvan.

Ayrton spoke calmly. Glenarvan gazed at him steadily, and then sent
word to MacNabb and Paganel, who at once obeyed his summons.

"We are ready for you," said Glenarvan, as soon as his two friends were
seated at the cabin-table.

Glenarvan, who was accustomed to Ayrton's manners, betrayed no
surprise, although a matter of business between this man and himself
seemed strange.

"No," corrected Glenarvan: "what are these advantages?"

Glenarvan hesitated before answering a question so plainly asked.
Perhaps the fate of Harry Grant depended upon what he was about to say.
However, the feeling of duty towards humanity prevailed, and he said:

Glenarvan, who was little prepared for this proposal, glanced at his
two friends, who remained silent. After a few moments of reflection, he
replied:

"I will trust you, Ayrton," said Glenarvan, simply.

"Go on, Ayrton," replied Glenarvan.

A keen disappointment was manifest on the features of Glenarvan and
the major. They had believed the quartermaster to possess an important
secret, and yet he now confessed that his disclosures would be almost
useless.

"No matter," replied Glenarvan; "I accept your proposal, Ayrton. You
have my word that you shall be landed at one of the islands of the
Pacific."

"We have no questions to ask you," rejoined Glenarvan. "Tell us what
you know, Ayrton, and, in the first place, who you are."

"Go on, Ayrton," said Glenarvan.

The quartermaster ceased, crossed his arms, according to his custom,
and waited. Glenarvan and his friends were silent. They felt that this
strange criminal had told the entire truth. The capture of the Duncan
had only failed through a cause altogether beyond his control. His
accomplices had reached Twofold Bay, as the convict's blouse, found by
Glenarvan, proved. There, faithful to the orders of their chief, they
had lain in wait for the yacht, and at last, tired of watching, they
had doubtless resumed their occupation of plunder and burning in the
fields of New South Wales.

"Continue, Ayrton," said Glenarvan. "The least sign may set us on the
track."

"But," added Glenarvan, "there is nothing in these half-obliterated
portions of the document which can apply to New Zealand."

"Well, Ayrton," continued Glenarvan, "you have kept your word, and I
will keep mine. We will decide on what island of the Pacific you shall
be abandoned."

"Yes," replied Glenarvan. "He has a strong and self-reliant character.
Why must his abilities be devoted to crime?"

As we have remarked, the geographer, although so loquacious and
excitable usually, had scarcely spoken during Ayrton's examination. He
had listened in total silence. But this last word that he had uttered
was worth more than all the others, and startled Glenarvan at once.

"Then New Zealand----?" asked Glenarvan.

"Hear and judge," replied Paganel. "I did not commit the blunder
that saved us, without reason. Just as I was writing that letter
at Glenarvan's dictation, the word Zealand was troubling my brain.
You remember that we were in the cart. MacNabb had just told Lady
Helena the story of the convicts, and had handed her the copy of the
_Australian and New Zealand Gazette_ that gave an account of the
accident at Camden Bridge. As I was writing, the paper lay on the
ground, folded so that only two syllables of its title could be seen,
and these were _aland_. What a light broke in upon my mind! 'Aland'
was one of the very words in the English document,--a word that we had
hitherto translated _ashore_, but which was the termination of the
proper name Zealand."

Paganel stopped. His interpretation was admissible. But, although
it appeared as probable as the other, still it might be as false.
Glenarvan and the major therefore no longer attempted to dispute it.
However, since the traces of the Britannia had not been encountered on
the coasts of Patagonia or Australia, the chances were in favor of New
Zealand.

"Now, Paganel," said Glenarvan, "will you tell me why, for about two
months, you kept this interpretation secret?"

"Then your opinion is----?" asked Glenarvan.

"Keep all this silent, my friends," replied Glenarvan, "and leave me to
choose the time for telling this sad news to the children of Captain
Grant."

"But then," said Glenarvan, "if an eruption created it, may we not fear
that the same agency will destroy it?"

"Well," continued Glenarvan, "do you think, captain, that we can land
before night?"

"Is the island inhabited?" asked Glenarvan.

"We will seek some other deserted island," resumed Glenarvan, who could
not help smiling at MacNabb's delicacy. "I promised Ayrton his life,
and I will keep my promise."

In the stillness Mary and Robert Grant came on deck. The two children,
leaning upon the railing, gazed sadly at the phosphorescent sea and the
luminous wake of the yacht. Mary thought of Robert's future; Robert
thought of his sister's; both thought of their father. Was that beloved
parent still living? Yet must they give him up? But no, what would life
be without him? What would become of them without his protection? What
would have become of them already, except for the magnanimity of Lord
and Lady Glenarvan?

"We will keep it, my sister. All that has been well arranged by our
friend John and Lord Glenarvan, who will keep you at Malcolm Castle
like a daughter. He said so to John, who told me. You will be at home
there, and wait till John and I bring back our father. Ah, what a
joyful day that will be!" cried Robert, whose face was radiant with
enthusiasm.

"But how shall we pay our debt to Lord and Lady Glenarvan?" continued
Mary.

The man at the helm hastened to Miss Grant's assistance, and after
him the sailors of the watch, Captain Mangles, Lady Helena, and Lord
Glenarvan, who had been suddenly awakened.

The witnesses of this sorrowful scene perceived at last that the two
children had been the sport of an hallucination. But how undeceive
their senses, which had been so strongly impressed? Glenarvan, however,
attempted it, and taking Robert by the hand, said:

Glenarvan saw plainly that he could not undeceive the poor child.
Still, he made a last attempt, and called the helmsman.

Robert's voice was choked by a sob. Pale and speechless, he, too, like
his sister, lost consciousness. Glenarvan had him carried to his bed,
and the child, overcome by emotion, sank into a profound slumber.

"Yes," replied Glenarvan, "excessive grief has produced upon both at
the same moment a similar effect."

No one knew what to say. Were there three men, shipwrecked sailors,
Englishmen, on that island? All recalled the events of the night
before, and thought of the voice heard by Robert and Mary. Perhaps,
after all, they were not mistaken. A voice might have reached them.
But could this voice be that of their father? No, alas, no! And each,
thinking of the terrible disappointment that was probably in store,
trembled lest this new trial would exceed their strength. But how
restrain them? Lord Glenarvan had not the courage.

In a moment this was done; the two children, Glenarvan, Captain
Mangles, and Paganel stepped into it, and six earnest and skilled
oarsmen sped away towards the shore.

As soon as he gained the deck, Harry Grant sank upon his knees. The
pious Scotchman, on touching what was to him the soil of his country,
wished, first of all, to thank God for his deliverance. Then, turning
towards Lady Helena; Lord Glenarvan, and their companions, he thanked
them in a voice broken by emotion. While on their way to the yacht, his
children had briefly told him the story of the Duncan.

How great a debt of gratitude did he feel that he owed this noble woman
and her companions! From Lord Glenarvan down to the lowest sailor,
had not all struggled and suffered for him? Harry Grant expressed
the feelings of thankfulness that overflowed his heart with so much
simplicity and nobleness, and his manly countenance was illumined by so
pure and sincere a sentiment, that all felt themselves repaid for the
trials they had undergone. Even the imperturbable major's eye was wet
with a tear that he could not repress. As for Paganel, he wept like a
child who does not think of hiding his emotion.

Lady Helena then told the story of the voyage, and made the captain
proud of his son and daughter. He learned the exploits of the young
hero, and how the boy had already repaid part of his obligation to Lord
Glenarvan at the peril of his life. Captain Mangles' language to Mary
and concerning her was so truly loving, that Harry Grant, who had been
already informed on this point by Lady Helena, placed the hand of his
daughter in that of the noble young captain, and, turning towards Lord
and Lady Glenarvan, said:

It was not long before Glenarvan related Ayrton's story to the captain,
who confirmed the quartermaster's declaration in regard to his having
been abandoned on the Australian coast.

But before Ayrton was transferred to Tabor Island, Harry Grant wished
to show his new friends the bounds of his habitation. He invited them
to visit his house, and sit for once at his table. Glenarvan and his
companions cordially accepted the invitation, and Robert and Mary
were not a little desirous to see those haunts where their father had
doubtless at times bewailed his fate. A boat was manned, and the whole
party soon disembarked on the shores of the island.

"And why, captain?" asked Glenarvan.

"Ah!" said Glenarvan. "Then you have not abandoned the idea that has
made you so popular in your native land?"

"Well, captain," cried Glenarvan, "the future is before us! Let us seek
this land together!"

"And what are they, captain?" inquired Glenarvan. "Tell us, for our
curiosity is great."

"Well, give us the French document," said Glenarvan. "This one was
spared the most by the waves, and has served as the principal basis for
our search."

They returned to the vessel; and, as he expected to sail the same day,
Glenarvan gave orders for the quartermaster's landing. Ayrton was
brought on deck, and found himself in the presence of Harry Grant.

Then Glenarvan, addressing the quartermaster, said:

Such were the last words exchanged between Glenarvan and the
quartermaster. The boat was ready, and Ayrton embarked. Captain Mangles
had previously sent to the island several cases of preserved food, some
clothes, tools, weapons, and a supply of powder and shot. The abandoned
man could therefore employ his time to advantage. Nothing was wanting,
not even books, foremost among which was a Bible.

"He must, Helena," answered Glenarvan. "It is his punishment."

At this moment the boat, commanded by Captain Mangles, started. Ayrton
raised his hat and gave a grave salute. Glenarvan and the crew returned
this last farewell, as if to a man about to die, as he departed, in a
profound silence.

"Yes, John," replied Glenarvan, quickly, with more emotion than he
wished to manifest.

Thus it was that Harry Grant and his two companions were rescued, and
that John Mangles married Mary Grant in the old cathedral of St. Mungo,
where the Rev. Mr. Morton, who nine months before had prayed for the
rescue of the father, now blessed the union of the daughter with one
of his deliverers. It was arranged that Robert should be a sailor,
like his father and brother-in-law, and that he should continue the
contemplated project of the former, under the munificent patronage of
Lord Glenarvan.

The geographer's secret would doubtless have remained forever
buried in the abysses of the unknown if the major had not told it to
Glenarvan, who did not conceal it from Lady Helena, who communicated
it to Mrs. Mangles. In short, it reached the ear of Mrs. Olbinett, and
spread.

The return of Captain Grant to Scotland was welcomed as a cause for
national rejoicing, and he became the popular man of old Caledonia. His
son Robert has become a sailor like himself, and, under the patronage
of Lord Glenarvan, has undertaken the plan of founding a Scottish
colony on the shores washed by the Pacific Ocean.