I.      The Shark
         II.      The Three Documents
        III.      The Captain's Children
         IV.      Lady Glenarvan's Proposal
          V.      The Departure of the Duncan
         VI.      An Unexpected Passenger
        VII.      Jacques Paganel is Undeceived
       VIII.      The Geographer's Resolution
         IX.      Through the Strait of Magellan
          X.      The Course Decided
         XI.      Traveling in Chili
        XII.      Eleven Thousand Feet Aloft
       XIII.      A Sudden Descent
        XIV.      Providentially Rescued
         XV.      Thalcave
        XVI.      News of the Lost Captain
       XVII.      A Serious Necessity
      XVIII.      In Search of Water
        XIX.      The Red Wolves
         XX.      Strange Signs
        XXI.      A False Trail
       XXII.      The Flood
      XXIII.      A Singular Abode
       XXIV.      Paganel's Disclosure
        XXV.      Between Fire and Water
       XXVI.      The Return on Board
      XXVII.      A New Destination
     XXVIII.      Tristan d'Acunha and the Isle of Amsterdam
       XXIX.      The Storm on the Indian Ocean
        XXX.      A Hospitable Colonist
       XXXI.      The Quartermaster of the Britannia
      XXXII.      Preparations for the Journey
     XXXIII.      An Accident
      XXXIV.      Australian Explorers
       XXXV.      Crime or Calamity?
      XXXVI.      Fresh Faces
     XXXVII.      A Warning
    XXXVIII.      Wealth in the Wilderness
      XXXIX.      Suspicious Occurrences
         XL.      A Startling Discovery
        XLI.      The Plot Unveiled
       XLII.      Four Days of Anguish
      XLIII.      Helpless and Hopeless
       XLIV.      A Rough Captain
        XLV.      The Wreck of the Macquarie
       XLVI.      Vain Efforts
      XLVII.      A Dreaded Country
     XLVIII.      Introduction to the Cannibals
       XLIX.      A Momentous Interview
          L.      The Chief's Funeral
         LI.      Strangely Liberated
        LII.      The Sacred Mountain
       LIII.      A Bold Stratagem
        LIV.      From Peril to Safety
         LV.      Why the Duncan went to New Zealand
        LVI.      Ayrton's Obstinacy
       LVII.      A Discouraging Confession
      LVIII.      A Cry in the Night
        LIX.      Captain Grant's Story
         LX.      Paganel's Last Entanglement

Paganel was right, for he could soon exchange a few words with the
native. He even learned that his name was Thalcave, a word which
signifies in Araucanian "the thunderer." This surname was doubtless
given to him for his skill in the use of fire-arms.

Fortunately Thalcave solved the difficulty. This guide, who was
accustomed to conduct travelers along the Patagonian frontiers, and
was one of the most intelligent baqueanos of the country, engaged to
furnish Glenarvan all that his little party needed. He offered to take
him to a "tolderia" (encampment) of Indians, about four miles distant,
where they would find everything necessary for the expedition. This
proposal was made partly by gestures, partly by Spanish words which
Paganel succeeded in understanding. It was accepted, and Glenarvan and
his learned friend, taking leave of their companions, reascended the
stream under the guidance of the Patagonian.

They proceeded at a good pace for an hour and a half, taking long
strides to keep up to the giant Thalcave. All the region was charming,
and of a rich fertility. The grassy pastures succeeded each other,
and could easily have fed thousands of cattle. Large ponds, united by
a winding chain of streams, gave these plains a verdant moisture.
Black-headed swans sported on the mirror-like surface, and disputed the
empire of the waters with numberless ostriches that gamboled over the
plains, while the brilliant feathered tribes were in wonderful variety.

Thalcave took upon himself the negotiation, which was not long. In
return for seven small Argentine horses, all saddled, a hundred pounds
of dried meat, a few measures of rice, and some leathern bottles for
water, the Indians received twenty ounces of gold, the value of which
they perfectly understood. Glenarvan would have bought another horse
for the Patagonian, but he intimated that it was unnecessary.

As for Paganel, he did not leave the Indian. He became Thalcave's
shadow, and could not remain quiet in the presence of a real
Patagonian, in comparison with whom he would have passed for a dwarf.
He overwhelmed the grave Indian with Spanish phrases, to which the
latter quietly listened. The geographer studied this time without a
book, and was often heard repeating words aloud.

At eight o'clock the next morning Thalcave gave the signal for
departure. The slope was gradual, and the travelers had only to descend
a gentle declivity to the sea.

At the moment of departure Thalcave whistled in a peculiar manner.
Immediately a magnificent Argentine horse, of superb form, issued from
a small wood near by, and approached at the call of his master. The
animal was perfectly beautiful. His brown color indicated a sound,
spirited and courageous beast. He had a small and elegantly poised
head, widely opening nostrils, a fiery eye, large hams, swelling
withers, broad breast, long pasterns, in short, all the qualities that
constitute strength and suppleness. The major, like a perfect horseman,
admired unreservedly this specimen of the horses of the plains. This
beautiful creature was called Thaouka, which means "bird" in the
Patagonian language, and he justly merited this appellation.

When Thalcave was in the saddle, the horse pranced with spirited grace,
and the Patagonian, a skillful rider, was magnificent to behold. His
outfit comprised two weapons of the chase, the "bolas" and the lasso.
The bolas consists of three balls tied together by a leathern string,
which are fastened to the front of the saddle. The Indians frequently
throw them the distance of a hundred paces at the animal or enemy that
they are pursuing, and with such precision that they twist about their
legs and bring them to the ground. It is, therefore, in their hands a
formidable instrument, and they handle it with surprising dexterity.
The lasso, on the contrary, does not leave the hand that wields it. It
consists simply of a leathern thong thirty feet in length, terminating
in a slip-noose which works upon an iron ring. The right hand throws
the slip-noose, while the left hand holds the remainder of the lasso,
the end of which is firmly tied to the saddle. A long carbine in a
sling completed the Patagonian's armament.

Thalcave, without observing the admiration caused by his natural
grace, ease and courage, took the lead, and the party advanced, now
at a gallop, and now at a walk, for their horses seemed entirely
unaccustomed to trotting. Robert mounted with much boldness, and
speedily convinced Glenarvan of his ability to keep his seat.

He explained that this pampero is frequent on the Argentine Plains. It
is a very dry wind from the southwest. Thalcave was not mistaken, and
during the night, which was quite uncomfortable for people sheltered
with a simple poncho, the wind blew with great violence. The horses lay
down on the ground, and the men near them in a close group. Glenarvan
feared they would be delayed if the storm continued; but Paganel
reassured him after consulting his barometer.

Hitherto Thalcave had made no remark concerning the line so rigorously
followed. He understood, however, that if they kept no definite
course over the Pampas, they would not come to cities or villages.
Every morning they advanced towards the rising sun, without deviating
from the straight line, and every evening the setting sun was behind
them. In his capacity of guide, Thalcave must, therefore, have been
astonished to see that not only he did not guide them, but that they
guided him. Nevertheless, if he was astonished, with the reserve
natural to the Indians he made no remark. But to-day arriving at the
above-mentioned road, he stopped his horse, and turned towards Paganel.

"We do not take it?" resumed Thalcave.

Thalcave was silent, and gazed at the geographer with profound
surprise. He did not admit, however, that Paganel was joking the least
in the world. An Indian, with his natural seriousness, never imagines
that you are not speaking in earnest.

At this moment Glenarvan, rejoining Paganel, asked what Thalcave said,
and why he had stopped.

The geographer was just then a curious sight. He gesticulated,
articulated, and exerted himself in a hundred ways, while great
drops of sweat rolled down his face. When his tongue could no longer
move, his arm came to his aid. He dismounted, and traced on the
sand a geographical map, with lines of latitude and longitude, the
two oceans, and the road to Carmen. Never was professor in such
embarrassment. Thalcave watched these manoeuvres without showing whether
he comprehended or not.

Thalcave did not stir. He no longer spoke. His eyes were fixed upon
the figures traced on the sand, which the wind was gradually effacing.

Thalcave did not appear to hear him. Paganel already saw an ironical
smile forming upon the lips of the major, and, wishing to save
his reputation, had begun with renewed energy his geographical
demonstrations, when the Patagonian stopped him with a gesture.

"And exactly on the line from the setting to the rising sun?" said
Thalcave, indicating by a comparison, in the Indian manner, the course
from west to east.

"May his will be accomplished then!" replied Thalcave, with a certain
solemnity. "We will go to the east, and, if necessary, even to the sun."

As soon as this word was translated, Thalcave was surrounded by the
seven travelers, who gazed at him with questioning looks. Paganel,
excited and scarcely finding his words, resumed these interesting
interrogatories, while his eyes, fixed upon the grave Indian, strove
to anticipate his reply before it issued from his lips. Every word the
Patagonian said he repeated in English, so that his companions heard
the Indian speak, as it were, in their own language.

"He was a stranger," replied Thalcave slowly; "a European."

Immediately Robert, taking Thalcave's hands, said in a sweet voice,--

But Paganel had not finished his inquiries. Where was this prisoner?
What was he doing? When had Thalcave heard of him? All these questions
thronged his mind at once. He did not have to wait long for answers,
but learnt that the European was a slave of one of the Indian tribes
that scour the plains.

"With the cazique Calfoucoura," answered Thalcave.

"I do not know," replied Thalcave.

They set out at daybreak. The horses advanced at a brisk pace among
the tufts of "paja-brava," a kind of grass that serves the Indians
as a shelter during the storms. At certain distances, but less and
less frequent, pools of shallow water contributed to the growth of
willows and a certain plant which is found in the neighborhood of
fresh water. Here the horses drank their fill, to fortify themselves
for the journey. Thalcave, who rode in advance, beat the bushes, and
thus frightened away the "cholinas" (vipers), while the agile Thaouka
bounded over all obstacles, and aided his master in clearing a passage
for the horses that followed.

Early in the afternoon, the first traces of animals were
encountered--the bones of an innumerable drove of cattle, in whitened
heaps. These fragments did not extend in a winding line, such as
animals exhausted and falling one by one would leave behind them. Thus
no one, not even Paganel, knew how to explain this chain of skeletons
in a space comparatively circumscribed. He therefore questioned
Thalcave, who was not at a loss for a reply.

But Thalcave reaffirmed it, and he was not mistaken; for the storms of
the Pampas are noted for their violence.

A few paces from the rancho, a hole was dug which served as a kitchen
and contained half-cooled embers. Within, there was a bench, a bed of
ox-hide, a saucepan, a spit, and a pot for boiling maté. The maté is
a drink very much in use in South America. It is the Indian's tea,
consisting of a decoction of leaves dried in the fire, and is imbibed
through a straw. At Paganel's request, Thalcave prepared several
cups of this beverage, which very agreeably accompanied the ordinary
eatables, and was declared excellent.

The next day they resumed their journey towards the east. About noon
a change took place in the appearance of the Pampas, which could
not escape eyes wearied with its monotony. The grass became more and
more scanty, and gave place to sickly burdocks and gigantic thistles;
while stunted nettles and other thorny shrubs grew here and there.
Heretofore, a certain moisture, preserved by the clay of the prairie,
freshened the meadows; the vegetation was thick and luxuriant. But now
a patchy growth, bare in many places, exposed the earth, and indicated
the poverty of the soil. These signs of increasing dryness could not be
mistaken, and Thalcave called attention to them.

However, when Wilson said that the supply of water would not fail
he had not calculated for the unquenchable thirst that consumed his
companions all that day; and, when he added that they would meet with
some stream in their journey he had anticipated too much. Indeed, not
only were rivers wanting, but even the artificial wells dug by the
Indians were empty. On seeing these indications of dryness increase
from mile to mile, Paganel asked Thalcave where he expected to find
water.

During the day the monotony of the journey was interrupted. Mulready,
who rode in advance, turned back, signaling the approach of a party of
Indians. This meeting elicited different opinions. Glenarvan thought
of the information that these natives might furnish concerning the
shipwrecked seamen of the Britannia. Thalcave, for his part, scarcely
enjoyed meeting in his journey the wandering Indians of the plains.
He considered them plunderers and robbers, and only sought to avoid
them. According to his orders, the little party collected together, and
made ready their fire-arms. It was necessary to be prepared for any
emergency.

"What are these Indians?" inquired Paganel of Thalcave.

At eight o'clock Thalcave, who had gone a little in advance, announced
that the lake so long desired was in sight. A quarter of an hour
afterward the little party descended the high banks. But here a serious
disappointment awaited them,--the lake was dry!

When Thalcave announced the presence of a drinkable liquid at Lake
Salinas, he meant the streams of fresh water that flow from it in
many places. But at this time its affluents were as dry as itself.
The burning sun had absorbed everything. Hence, the consternation was
general when the thirsty party arrived at the parched shores of Lake
Salinas.

When each had sat down in the roukah, Paganel asked Thalcave's advice
as to what was best to be done. A rapid conversation, of which
Glenarvan caught a few words, ensued between the geographer and the
Indian. Thalcave spoke calmly, while Paganel gesticulated for both.
This consultation lasted a few minutes, and then the Patagonian folded
his arms.

"The plan is good," replied Glenarvan, "and we will follow it without
delay. My horse has not suffered so much yet from want of water, and I
offer to accompany Thalcave."

"Oh, you, my dear Paganel!" replied the major, "you will remain with
the reserve detachment. You know the course, the Guamini River, and the
Pampas, too well to abandon us. Neither Wilson, Mulready, nor myself
are capable of rejoining Thalcave at his rendezvous, unless we advance
confidently under the guidance of the brave Jacques Paganel."

"You would deserve it, my intolerable major," said Paganel, smiling.
"But tell me, my dear Glenarvan, how will you understand Thalcave's
language?"

Thalcave was right in first proceeding towards the Guamini, since this
stream lay on the prescribed course, and was the nearest. The three
horses galloped briskly forward. These excellent beasts perceived,
doubtless, by instinct, whither their masters were guiding them.
Thaouka, especially, showed a spirit that neither fatigue nor thirst
could overcome. The other horses followed, at a slower pace, but
incited by his example.

"Bravo, Robert!" said Glenarvan. "Thalcave seems to congratulate you.
He praises you, my boy!"

During this conversation, their horses had relaxed their pace and
fallen behind the other; but Thalcave called them, and they resumed
their former gait. It was soon evident, however, that, with the
exception of Thaouka, the horses could not long maintain this speed. At
noon it was necessary to give them an hour's rest.

Glenarvan grew uneasy. The signs of dryness did not diminish, and the
want of water might result in disastrous consequences. Thalcave said
nothing, but probably thought that if the Guamini was dry it would then
be time to despair, if indeed an Indian's heart has ever experienced
such an emotion.

They therefore kept on, and by use of whip and spur the horses were
induced to continue their journey, but they could not quicken their
pace. Thalcave might easily have gone ahead, for in a few hours Thaouka
could have carried him to the banks of the stream. He doubtless thought
of it, but probably did not like to leave his two companions alone in
the midst of this desert, and, that he might not outstrip them, he
forced Thaouka to lessen his speed. It was not, however, without much
resistance, prancing and neighing, that Thalcave's horse consented to
keep pace with the others. It was not so much the strength as the voice
of his master which restrained him; the Indian actually talked to his
horse; and the animal, if he did not answer, at least comprehended
him. The Patagonian must have used excellent arguments, for, after
"discussing" some time, Thaouka yielded, and obeyed his master's
commands.

But, if Thaouka understood Thalcave, Thalcave had none the less
understood Thaouka. The intelligent animal, through his superior
instincts, had perceived a moisture in the air. He inhaled it eagerly,
and kept moving his tongue, as if it were steeped in a grateful liquid.
The Patagonian could not be deceived; water was not far distant.

Nothing was heard but the sound of rapid drinking. As for Thalcave,
he drank quietly, without hurrying, long and deeply, till they might
perhaps fear that the stream would be drained.

"Well," said Glenarvan, "our friends will not be disappointed in their
expectations. They are sure, on arriving at the Guamini, to find an
abundance of clear water, if Thalcave leaves any!"

Thalcave had not waited for Glenarvan's orders to search for a place
to encamp. He had very fortunately found on the banks of the river a
"ramada," a kind of inclosure designed for a cattle-fold and shut in
on three sides. The situation was excellent for the purpose, so long
as one did not fear to sleep in the open air; and that was the least
anxiety of Thalcave's companions. Thus they did not seek a better
retreat, but stretched themselves on the ground in the sun to dry their
water-soaked garments.

Glenarvan had conceived this idea because the banks of the Guamini
seemed to be the haunt of the game of the surrounding plains.
"Tinamous," a kind of partridge, plovers called "teru-teru," yellow
rails, and water-fowl of magnificent green were seen rising in flocks.
As for quadrupeds, they did not make their appearance; but Thalcave,
pointing to the tall grass and thick coppice, explained that they
were hidden there. The hunters had only to take a few steps to find
themselves in one of the best game-coverts in the world.

As for Thalcave, he showed his companions a "nandou" hunt. This bird,
peculiar to the Pampas, is a kind of ostrich, whose swiftness is
marvelous.

Thalcave, arriving at a proper distance, launched his "bolas" with a
strong hand, and so skillfully that they twisted about the legs of
the ostrich and paralyzed its efforts. In a few moments it lay on
the ground. The Indian soon captured his prize and contributed it
to the common repast. The string of partridges, Thalcave's ostrich,
Glenarvan's peccary, and Robert's armadillo were brought back to camp.
The ostrich and the peccary were immediately stripped of their skin
and cut into small slices. As for the armadillo, it is a dainty animal
which carries its roasting dish with it, and it was, accordingly,
placed in its own bony covering on the glowing embers.

Glenarvan, Robert, and Thalcave had yielded to the common law, and,
stretched on their thick beds of grass, they enjoyed a refreshing
sleep. The horses, overcome with fatigue, had lain down on the ground:
Thaouka alone, like a true blooded horse, slept standing, spirited in
repose as in action, and ready to start at the least sign from his
master. Perfect tranquillity reigned within the inclosure, and the
embers of the night-fire, as they gradually died out, cast their last
rays over the silent obscurity.

According to this conjecture, Thalcave had only to await the progress
of events, which he did, half reclining, his head resting on his hands,
his elbows on his knees, his eyes motionless, in the attitude of a man
whom a sudden anxiety has awakened from sleep.

An hour passed. Any other person but Thalcave, reassured by the outward
silence, would have lain down again. But where a stranger would have
suspected nothing, the highly-trained senses and natural instinct of
the Indian foresaw the coming danger.

He arose and scanned the plain attentively. Silence still reigned, but
not tranquillity. Thalcave discerned shadows moving noiselessly among
the tufts of grass. Here and there glittered luminous points, which
spread on all sides, now fading away, and now gleaming forth again. You
would have thought fantastic elves were dancing on the surface of an
immense lagoon. A stranger would doubtless have taken these flitting
sparks for glow-worms, which shine, when night comes, in many parts of
the Pampas. But Thalcave was not deceived; he knew with what enemies he
had to deal. He loaded his carbine, and took a position near the first
stakes of the inclosure.

Glenarvan and Robert had stationed themselves so as to defend the
entrance of the ramada, and with their loaded rifles were about to fire
at the first ranks of wolves, when Thalcave turned aside their weapons
already poised for a shot.

"What does Thalcave wish?" asked Robert.

This was not, however, the motive which actuated the Indian, but a
graver reason, which Glenarvan understood when Thalcave, raising his
powder-flask and inverting it, showed that it was almost empty.

At this moment another report resounded. Thalcave had brought down a
too bold enemy. The wolves that were advancing in close ranks recoiled,
and gathered together again a hundred paces from the inclosure.

Glenarvan, at a sign from the Indian, took his place at once, while the
latter, collecting the bedding, grass, and all combustible materials,
piled them at the entrance of the ramada and threw on a burning ember.
Soon a curtain of flame was defined against the dark background of the
sky, and through the openings the plain appeared illumined by great
moving reflections. Glenarvan could therefore judge of the great number
of animals against which they had to defend themselves. Never had so
many wolves been seen together before, nor so excited by rapacity. The
fiery barrier that Thalcave had just opposed to them had redoubled
their fury. Some, however, advanced to the very fire, crowded by
the rear ranks, and burned their paws. From time to time a shot was
necessary to check the howling horde, and at the end of an hour fifteen
bodies lay on the prairie.

He turned towards Thalcave, and, recalling a few words of Spanish,
began a conversation with the Indian, frequently interrupted by the
cracks of the rifle.

Nevertheless, a quarter of an hour passed before he could give to
Robert the meaning of Thalcave's answer. He had questioned the Indian
concerning their situation.

Already Thalcave had set the example, and when a wolf approached the
fire, the long knife of the Patagonian was thrust through the flames
and drawn back again red with blood.

However, the means of defense were failing. About two o'clock in the
morning, Thalcave threw into the fire the last armful of fuel, and the
besieged had only five charges left.

"No, my boy, no," replied Glenarvan; "and you are right. In two hours,
day will appear, and we shall be saved! Well done, Thalcave, my brave
Patagonian!" cried he, as the Indian killed with the butt of his gun
two enormous beasts that were attempting to cross the glowing barrier.

Thalcave discharged his carbine for the last time, stretched out one
more of their enemies, and, as his ammunition was exhausted, folded
his arms. His head sank upon his breast; he appeared to be questioning
himself. Was he searching for some bold, novel, or rash scheme for
repelling this furious herd? Glenarvan did not venture to ask him.

But Thalcave shook his head. He knew well that the animals would not
abandon a certain prey until at daybreak they returned to their holes
and dens.

Thalcave, turning like a deer, had suddenly approached his horse,
which was neighing with impatience, and was beginning to saddle him
carefully, forgetting neither strap nor buckle. He seemed no longer to
care for the howls, that were now redoubled. Glenarvan gazed at him
with a dark foreboding.

"He is leaving us!" cried he, seeing Thalcave gather up his reins as
though he were about to mount.

"Friend Thalcave," replied Robert, looking imploringly at the
Patagonian, "friend Thalcave, do not leave us!"

"Very well," said Glenarvan. "Thalcave shall not leave, Robert. He
shows me what I have to do. It is my duty to go, and his to remain with
you."

"I tell you," cried Glenarvan, taking the bridle from the hands of the
Indian, "I will go. Save this boy! I trust him to you, Thalcave!"

However, Thalcave resisted, and the discussion was prolonged. The
danger was increasing every moment. Already the broken stakes were
yielding to the teeth and claws of the wolves. But neither Glenarvan
nor Thalcave appeared willing to yield. The Indian had drawn Glenarvan
towards the entrance of the inclosure. He pointed to the plain, now
free from wolves. In his animated language, he explained that not a
moment was to be lost; that the danger, if this plan failed, would be
greater for those who remained; in short, that he alone knew Thaouka
well enough to employ his marvelous agility and speed for the common
safety. Glenarvan blindly persisted in his resolve to sacrifice
himself, when suddenly he was pushed violently back. Thaouka pranced,
reared on his hind legs, and all at once, with a spring, cleared the
barrier of fire and the rampart of bodies, while a boyish voice cried,--

Glenarvan and Thalcave had scarcely time to perceive Robert, who,
clinging to the horse's mane, disappeared in the darkness.

Thalcave and Glenarvan rushed out of the ramada. Already the plain had
resumed its tranquillity, and they could scarcely distinguish a moving
line which undulated afar in the shadows of the night.

Glenarvan sank upon the ground, overcome, in despair, clasping his
hands. He gazed at Thalcave, who smiled with his accustomed calmness.

In spite of Thalcave's confidence, his companion passed the night in
terrible anguish. He was no longer even mindful of the danger still to
be feared from the wolves. He would have gone in search of Robert, but
the Indian restrained him, and explained that their horses could not
overtake the boy, that Thaouka must have distanced his enemies, and
could not be found in the darkness. They must wait for day to start in
search of Robert.

Thalcave and he urged their horses to a more rapid pace, and a few
moments afterwards they joined the party led by Paganel.

"Why, my son, did you not let Thalcave or me try this last chance of
saving you?"

"My lord," replied he, in accents of the liveliest gratitude, "was it
not my duty to sacrifice myself, when Thalcave has saved my life, and
you are going to save my father?"

At ten o'clock Glenarvan gave the signal for departure. The
water-bottles were filled, and they set out. The horses, being greatly
revived, evinced much spirit, and maintained an easy and almost
continuous canter. The next morning they crossed the boundary which
separates the Argentine Plains from the Pampas. Here Thalcave hoped
to meet the chiefs in whose hands he doubted not that he should find
Harry Grant and rescue him and his two companions from slavery.

When he had joined his companions, Paganel found Glenarvan in excited
conversation with the Indian, whom he did not appear to understand.
Thalcave had frequently stopped to examine the horizon, and each time
his countenance expressed a lively astonishment. Glenarvan, not seeing
his ordinary interpreter present, had attempted, but in vain, to
question the Patagonian. So, as soon as he perceived the geographer at
a distance, he cried,--

"Come, friend Paganel, Thalcave and I can scarcely succeed in
understanding each other."

"Thalcave is astonished at a circumstance that is really strange."

"And to what does Thalcave attribute this abandonment?"

"Chiefs of tribes that were very powerful thirty years ago, before they
were driven beyond the sierras. Since that time they have been subdued
as much as an Indian can be, and now scour the Pampas as well as the
province of Buenos Ayres. I am therefore astonished, like Thalcave,
at not encountering traces of them in a country where they generally
pursue the calling of plunderers."

After a few moments' conversation with Thalcave, he said,--

Glenarvan was quite disconcerted at finding no Indians on the Pampas,
a circumstance which was little expected. There are ordinarily too
many of them. Some special cause must therefore have removed them.
But a serious question was to be considered. If Captain Grant was a
prisoner of one of these tribes, had he been carried to the north or
to the south? This problem harassed Glenarvan. It was advisable at all
hazards to keep track of the captain. In short, it was better to follow
Thalcave's advice and reach the village of Tandil, where at least they
could obtain information.

The passage of this mountain was accomplished the next day with the
greatest ease. They followed the sandy undulations of a gradually
sloping terrace, which certainly did not present difficulties to
people who had scaled the Andes, and the horses scarcely relaxed their
rapid pace. At noon they reached the abandoned Fort Tapalquem, the
first of the chain of forts built on the southern frontier against the
plundering natives. But not a shadow of an Indian did they encounter,
to the increasing surprise of Thalcave; although, towards the middle of
the day, three rovers of the plain, well armed and mounted, gazed for
a moment at the little party, but prevented their approach, galloping
away with incredible rapidity. Glenarvan was furious.

According to Thalcave's orders, they advanced in close ranks, and
at evening encamped in a spacious abandoned rancho, where the chief
Catriel generally assembled his bands of natives. From an examination
of the ground and the absence of fresh tracks, the Patagonian knew that
it had not been occupied for a long time.

The next morning Glenarvan and his companions found themselves again
on the plain. The first estancias (vast establishments for raising
cattle), which border upon the Tandil, were descried; but Thalcave
resolved not to stop, but to keep straight on to Fort Independence,
where he wished to obtain information, especially concerning the
singular condition of this abandoned country.

Thalcave, meanwhile, hastened their progress, as he wished to arrive
that evening at Fort Independence. The horses, urged on by their
masters, and following the example of Thaouka, dashed through the
tall grass. They passed several farms, fortified and defended by deep
ditches. The principal house was provided with an elevated terrace,
from which the inmates could fire upon the plunderers of the plain.
Glenarvan might perhaps have obtained here the information that he
sought; but it was wisest to go to the village of Tandil. They did not
stop, therefore, and soon the feet of the horses struck the grassy
sward of the first mountain slopes. An hour afterward the village
appeared at the bottom of a narrow gorge crowned by the embattled walls
of Fort Independence.

Paganel, after giving his companions a brief account of the village of
Tandil, added that they could not fail to obtain information there;
moreover, the fort was always garrisoned by a detachment of national
troops. Glenarvan, accordingly, put the horses into the stable of a
"fonda;" and Paganel, the major, Robert, and he, under the guidance of
Thalcave, proceeded towards Fort Independence.

Thalcave, addressing him, introduced Lord Glenarvan and his companions.
While he spoke, the commander kept scrutinizing Paganel with quite
embarrassing persistence. The geographer did not know what the trooper
meant, and was about to ask him, when the latter unceremoniously seized
his hand, and said, in a joyous tone, in his own language,--

This story lasted a quarter of an hour, to Thalcave's great
astonishment. The Indian could not understand how so many words could
come from a single throat. No one interrupted the commander; and even
a French sergeant had to conclude at last, though not without forcing
his guests to accompany him to his dwelling. Here they were introduced
to Madame Ipharaguerre, who appeared to be "a good-looking person," if
this expression may be employed in regard to an Indian.

This answer was reported to Thalcave, who shook his head. Indeed,
he either did not know, or had forgotten, that a civil war, which
was afterwards to involve Brazil, was decimating two-thirds of the
republic. The Indians had everything to gain in these internal
struggles, and could not neglect such fine opportunities for plunder.
The sergeant, therefore, was not mistaken in attributing this desertion
of the Pampas to the civil war that was being waged in the northern
part of the Argentine Provinces.

A profound silence followed this declaration. The mistake was palpable.
The sergeant's story, the nationality of the prisoner, the murder
of his companion, and his escape from the hands of the Indians, all
accorded with the evident facts. Glenarvan gazed at Thalcave with a
bewildered air. The Indian then resumed the conversation.

Glenarvan was in despair at this complete overthrow of his hopes.
Robert walked beside him in silence, with tearful eyes, while his
protector could not find a single word to console him. Paganel
gesticulated and talked to himself. The major did not open his lips.
As for Thalcave, his Indian pride seemed humbled at having gone astray
on a false trail. No one, however, thought of reproaching him for so
excusable an error.

Glenarvan, with Robert at his side, galloped on in silence. His
lordship's bold and resolute character did not permit him to accept
this disappointment calmly. His heart beat violently, and his brain was
on fire. Paganel, tormented by the mystery of the document, arranged
the words in every way, as if to draw from them a new meaning. Thalcave
silently resigned himself to Thaouka's sagacity. The major, always
confident, performed his duties like a man upon whom discouragement can
have no effect. Tom Austin and his two sailors shared their master's
annoyance. Once, when a timid hare crossed the path in front of them,
the superstitious Scotchmen gazed at one another.

"The horns come from the ground," explained Thalcave; "and the cattle
are under it."

Thalcave now began to observe with an anxious air the state of things
around him. He frequently stopped, and rose in his stirrups. His tall
form enabled him to survey a wide range; but, perceiving nothing that
could enlighten him, he resumed his undeviating course. A mile farther,
he stopped again, and, turning from the beaten track, proceeded a short
distance, first to the north, then to the south, and then resumed his
place at the head of the party, without saying either what he hoped or
what he feared.

These manoeuvres, many times repeated, puzzled Paganel and annoyed
Glenarvan. The geographer was accordingly requested to interrogate
the Indian, which he did at once. Thalcave replied that he was
astonished to see the plain so soaked with moisture. Never within his
recollection, since he had performed the office of guide, had his feet
trodden a soil so saturated. Even in the season of the great rains the
Argentine plain was always easily passed.

"And what does Thalcave advise?" inquired Glenarvan.

Suddenly, about six o'clock in the evening, he manifested signs of
extreme agitation. He turned frequently towards the vast expanse to the
south; his neighs were prolonged, his nostrils keenly snuffed the air,
and he reared violently. Thalcave, whom his antics could not unseat,
managed his steed without difficulty. The froth from the horse's mouth
was mingled with blood under the action of the firmly-closed bit, and
yet the spirited animal could not be calm. If free, his master felt but
too well that he would have fled away at full speed towards the north.

[Illustration: "The flood! the flood!" replied Thalcave, spurring his
horse towards the north.]

"Quick! quick!" cried Thalcave, in a piercing voice.

"The flood! the flood!" replied Thalcave, spurring his horse towards
the north.

The wall of water descried by Thalcave advanced with the speed of a
race-horse. The travelers fled before it like a cloud driven by the
storm. Their eyes sought in vain a place of refuge. Sky and water
mingled together on the horizon. The horses, excited by the danger,
dashed along in a mad gallop, so that their riders could scarcely keep
their seats. Glenarvan frequently glanced behind him.

"Yes, yonder!" replied Thalcave, and he pointed northward to a kind of
gigantic walnut-tree, which rose solitary from the midst of the waters.

Thalcave, leaving his horse, and lifting Robert, seized the first limb,
and soon his powerful arms had lodged the exhausted swimmers in a place
of safety. But Thaouka, carried away by the current, was rapidly
disappearing. He turned his intelligent head towards his master, and,
shaking his long mane, neighed for him beseechingly.

Such was the asylum offered to Glenarvan's little party. Robert and the
nimble Wilson were scarcely perched in the tree, before they hastened
to climb to the topmost branches. Their heads protruded above the dome
of verdure. From this lofty position the view embraced a wide range.
The ocean created by the inundation surrounded them on all sides,
and their eyes could discern no limit. No other tree emerged from
the watery surface; the ombu, alone in the midst of the unconfined
waters, groaned at every shock. At a distance, borne along by the
impetuous current, floated uprooted trunks, twisted branches, thatch
torn from some demolished rancho, beams swept by the waters from the
roofs of cattle-folds, bodies of drowned animals, bloody skins, and,
on a swaying tree, a whole family of growling jaguars that clung with
their claws to this fragile raft. Still farther off, a black speck
almost invisible attracted Wilson's attention. It was Thalcave and his
faithful Thaouka, disappearing in the distance.

"Thalcave, friend Thalcave!" cried Robert, stretching out his hands
towards the courageous Patagonian.

A moment after, Robert and the sailor descended the three stories
of branches and found themselves among their companions. Glenarvan,
Paganel, the major, Austin, and Mulready were seated astraddle, or
dangling in the branches, according to their own inclinations. Wilson
gave an account of their visit to the top of the tree. All shared his
opinion in regard to Thalcave. The only question was, whether Thalcave
would save Thaouka, or Thaouka Thalcave.

"Of Thalcave. He thought it might be useful to us, and gave it to me
before going back to Thaouka."

It was now four o'clock in the afternoon, and they resolved to take
supper at six. Paganel wished to celebrate this joyful day by a
splendid banquet. As the bill of fare was very limited, he proposed
to Robert that they should go hunting "in the neighboring forest,"
at which idea the boy clapped his hands. They took Thalcave's
powder-flask, cleaned the revolvers, loaded them with fine shot, and
started.

"Thalcave!" repeated his companions, as with one voice.

Thalcave, in a few words, told his story to Paganel, and ascribed to
his intrepid horse all the honor of having saved him. Paganel then
endeavored to explain to him the new interpretation of the document,
and the hopes it led them to entertain. Did the Indian understand the
geographer's ingenious suppositions? It was very doubtful; but he saw
his friends happy and very confident, and he desired nothing more.

"Yes, the ocean!" replied Thalcave.

At this moment Thalcave, having loaded his carbine heavily, fired it in
the direction of the yacht. They gazed and listened. Three times the
Indian's gun resounded, waking the echoes of the shore.

Glenarvan now joined Thalcave, who, standing with folded arms alongside
of Thaouka, was calmly gazing at the waves.

"No," replied Thalcave, gently. "Here is Thaouka, and there are the
Pampas!" he added, indicating with a sweep of his hand the vast expanse
of the plains.

It was clear that the Indian would never leave the prairies, where the
bones of his fathers whitened. Glenarvan knew the strong attachment
of these children of the desert to their native country. He therefore
shook Thalcave's hand, and did not insist; not even when the Indian,
smiling in his peculiar way, refused the price of his services,
saying,--

His lordship, however, desired to give the brave Indian something which
might at least serve as a souvenir of his European friends. But what
had he left? His arms, his horses, everything had been lost in the
inundation. His friends were no richer than himself. For some moments
he was at a loss how to repay the disinterested generosity of the brave
guide; but at last a happy idea occurred to him. He drew from his
pocket-book a costly medallion inclosing an admirable portrait, one of
Lawrence's master-pieces, and presented it to Thalcave.

Thalcave gazed with wonder at the portrait, and pronounced these simple
words,--

The last acknowledgments were given, and Thalcave accompanied his
friends to the boat. Just as Robert was about to embark, the Indian
took him in his arms and gazed at him tenderly.

"Who knows?" replied Thalcave, raising his arms towards heaven.

They then spoke of the generous Thalcave. Lady Helena regretted that
she could not have shaken hands with the brave Indian. MacNabb, after
the first outbursts of enthusiasm, repaired to his cabin to shave
himself. As for Paganel, he flitted hither and thither, like a bee,
extracting the honey of compliments and smiles. He wished to embrace
all on board the Duncan, and, beginning with Lady Helena and Mary
Grant, ended with Mr. Olbinett, the steward, who could not better
recognize such politeness than by announcing breakfast.

No recital could have been more agreeable to Lady Helena and Miss
Grant, and Glenarvan hastened to satisfy their curiosity. He told, word
for word, all about their journey from ocean to ocean. The passage
of the Andes, the earthquake, Robert's disappearance, his capture by
the condor, Thalcave's fortunate shot, the adventure with the wolves,
the boy's devotion, the meeting with Sergeant Manuel, the inundation,
their refuge in the tree, the lightning, the fire, the alligators,
the water-spout, the night on the shores of the Atlantic, all these
incidents, cheerful or serious, excited alternately the joy and terror
of his hearers. Many a circumstance was related that brought Robert
the caresses of his sister and Lady Helena. Never was boy more highly
praised, or by more enthusiastic friends.