I.      The Shark
         II.      The Three Documents
        III.      The Captain's Children
         IV.      Lady Glenarvan's Proposal
          V.      The Departure of the Duncan
         VI.      An Unexpected Passenger
        VII.      Jacques Paganel is Undeceived
       VIII.      The Geographer's Resolution
         IX.      Through the Strait of Magellan
          X.      The Course Decided
         XI.      Traveling in Chili
        XII.      Eleven Thousand Feet Aloft
       XIII.      A Sudden Descent
        XIV.      Providentially Rescued
         XV.      Thalcave
        XVI.      News of the Lost Captain
       XVII.      A Serious Necessity
      XVIII.      In Search of Water
        XIX.      The Red Wolves
         XX.      Strange Signs
        XXI.      A False Trail
       XXII.      The Flood
      XXIII.      A Singular Abode
       XXIV.      Paganel's Disclosure
        XXV.      Between Fire and Water
       XXVI.      The Return on Board
      XXVII.      A New Destination
     XXVIII.      Tristan d'Acunha and the Isle of Amsterdam
       XXIX.      The Storm on the Indian Ocean
        XXX.      A Hospitable Colonist
       XXXI.      The Quartermaster of the Britannia
      XXXII.      Preparations for the Journey
     XXXIII.      An Accident
      XXXIV.      Australian Explorers
       XXXV.      Crime or Calamity?
      XXXVI.      Fresh Faces
     XXXVII.      A Warning
    XXXVIII.      Wealth in the Wilderness
      XXXIX.      Suspicious Occurrences
         XL.      A Startling Discovery
        XLI.      The Plot Unveiled
       XLII.      Four Days of Anguish
      XLIII.      Helpless and Hopeless
       XLIV.      A Rough Captain
        XLV.      The Wreck of the Macquarie
       XLVI.      Vain Efforts
      XLVII.      A Dreaded Country
     XLVIII.      Introduction to the Cannibals
       XLIX.      A Momentous Interview
          L.      The Chief's Funeral
         LI.      Strangely Liberated
        LII.      The Sacred Mountain
       LIII.      A Bold Stratagem
        LIV.      From Peril to Safety
         LV.      Why the Duncan went to New Zealand
        LVI.      Ayrton's Obstinacy
       LVII.      A Discouraging Confession
      LVIII.      A Cry in the Night
        LIX.      Captain Grant's Story
         LX.      Paganel's Last Entanglement

"You, Ayrton?" said the colonist, no less astonished than Glenarvan.

"I," repeated Ayrton, in an excited but firm tone; "I, a Scotchman like
yourself, my lord, one of the shipwrecked sailors of the Britannia!"

Mary Grant, half fainting with emotion, and overcome with happiness,
sank into the arms of Lady Helena; while Captain Mangles, Robert, and
Paganel went towards the man whom their host had called Ayrton.

The travelers felt all this at first sight. Ayrton's appearance had
interested them; and Glenarvan, acting as spokesman for all, pressed
him with inquiries. This strange meeting had evidently produced a
bewildering effect, and the first questions were, to some extent,
without order.

"Yes, my lord; Captain Grant's quartermaster," replied Ayrton.

This should have been the first question; but, in the excitement of the
moment, Glenarvan, anxious to know where Captain Grant was, had not
inquired where the Britannia was lost. From this point the conversation
assumed a more definite form, and soon the details of the complicated
story appeared clear and exact to the minds of Ayrton's hearers.

To the major's question Ayrton replied,--

"You see, then, my lord," added Ayrton, "that I was right in saying
that, if Captain Grant still lives, you must seek him in Australia."

No one noticed these flattering words of Paganel. Glenarvan, Lady
Helena, Mary, and Robert had crowded around Ayrton, and eagerly clasped
his hands. It seemed as if the presence of this man was a guarantee of
the safety of Harry Grant. Since the sailor had escaped the dangers
of shipwreck, why should not the captain be safe and sound? Ayrton
repeated his declaration that if Captain Grant were living he must be
in Australia. He answered with remarkable intelligence and clearness
the many questions that were propounded to him. Miss Mary, while
he spoke, held one of his hands in her own. This sailor had been a
companion of her father, one of the shipwrecked survivors of the
Britannia. He had lived with Harry Grant, had sailed the seas with him,
had braved the same dangers! She could not withdraw her eyes from that
weather-beaten face, and she wept with happiness.

Hitherto no one had thought of doubting the veracity of the
quartermaster. Only the major, and perhaps Captain Mangles, questioned
whether Ayrton's story merited _entire_ confidence. This unexpected
meeting might be suspicious. To be sure, Ayrton had mentioned facts and
dates that agreed, and striking particulars. But details, however exact
they may be, do not constitute a certainty; and generally, as we know,
falsehood endeavors to strengthen itself by its preciseness. MacNabb,
therefore, reserved his opinion.

As for Captain Mangles, his doubts did not stand long before the
assertions of the sailor, and he considered him a real companion of
Captain Grant when he heard him speak to the young girl of her father.
Ayrton knew Mary and Robert perfectly. He had seen them at Glasgow
on the departure of the Britannia. He remembered that they had been
present at the farewell dinner given on board to the friends of the
captain. Sheriff MacIntyre was one of the guests. Robert--scarcely
ten years old--had been confided to the care of Dick Turner, the
boatswain, but had escaped from him and climbed to the top-sail
yard-arm.

"Mr. Ayrton, please tell us more about our father."

Ayrton acceded to the young girl's request. Glenarvan was reluctant to
interrupt him, and yet many more important questions thronged his mind.
But Lady Helena, pointing out to him Mary's joyful excitement, checked
his inquiries.

The quartermaster now told the story of the Britannia and her voyage
across the Pacific. During the period of a year Harry Grant landed
at the principal ports of Oceanica, opposing unjustifiable captures,
and often a victim to the hostility of unjust traders. He found,
however, an important point on the western coast of Papua. Here the
establishment of a Scottish colony appeared to him feasible, and its
prosperity assured. After examining Papua, the Britannia sailed to
Callao for provisions, and left that port on the 30th of May, 1862, to
return to Europe by the way of the Indian Ocean and the Cape. Three
weeks after her departure, a terrible tempest disabled her. It became
necessary to cut away the masts. A leak was discovered in the hold,
which they did not succeed in stopping. The crew were soon overtasked
and exhausted. The pumps could not be worked. For eight days the
vessel was at the mercy of the storm. There were six feet of water
in her hold, and she gradually foundered. The boats had been washed
overboard, and the crew had given themselves up for lost, when on the
night of June 22nd, as Paganel had rightly interpreted, they descried
the eastern coast of Australia. The vessel soon stranded. A violent
shock was felt. At this moment Ayrton, borne by a wave, was cast into
the midst of the breakers, and lost all consciousness. When he came to
himself, he was in the hands of the natives, who carried him into the
interior of the country. Since then he had heard nothing more of the
Britannia, and naturally supposed that she had been wrecked, with all
on board, on the dangerous reefs of Twofold Bay.

This was Ayrton's story, which elicited more than once exclamations of
sympathy. The major could not justly doubt its correctness; and after
this recital the quartermaster's own experiences possessed a more real
interest. Indeed, thanks to the document, they no longer doubted that
Captain Grant had survived the shipwreck with two of his sailors. From
the fate of the one they could fairly conjecture that of the other.

Ayrton was invited to tell of his own adventures, which was soon and
simply done. The shipwrecked sailor, prisoner of a native tribe, was
carried into the interior regions watered by the Darling. Here he led
a very wretched existence, because the tribe itself was miserable; but
he was not maltreated. For two long years he endured a painful slavery.
However, the hope of regaining his liberty sustained his courage. He
watched for the least opportunity of escaping, although his flight
would plunge him into the midst of innumerable perils. One night
in October he eluded the vigilance of the natives, and took refuge
in the depths of extensive forests. For a month, living on roots,
edible ferns, and the gum of the mimosa, often overcome by despair,
he wandered in those vast solitudes, with the sun as his guide by
day and the stars by night. In this way he crossed marshes, rivers,
mountains, in short, all that uninhabited portion of country that few
travelers have explored. At last, exhausted and almost dead, he reached
the hospitable dwelling of Mr. O'Moore, where his labor insured him a
comfortable livelihood.

"And if Ayrton is pleased with me," said the Irish colonist, when the
story was finished, "I cannot but be pleased with him. He is an honest
and intelligent man, a good worker, and, if he chooses, this house
shall long be at his service."

Ayrton thanked Mr. O'Moore, and waited for further questions. He
probably thought, however, that the legitimate curiosity of his hearers
ought to be satisfied. What could he say that had not been repeated
a hundred times already? Glenarvan was, therefore, about to open the
conversation on a new topic, to profit by the information received from
Ayrton, when the major, addressing him, said:

"My lord, I will answer for it that Ayrton is an honest man. During the
two months that he has been in my employ, I have had no fault to find
with him. I knew the story of his shipwreck and captivity. He is a true
man, and worthy of your entire confidence."

Glenarvan was about to answer that he had never doubted Ayrton's
honesty, when the latter returned and presented his contract. It was a
paper signed by the owners of the Britannia and Captain Grant, whose
writing Mary recognized immediately. It stated that "Tom Ayrton, able
seaman, was engaged as quartermaster on board the brig Britannia of
Glasgow." There was, therefore, no possible doubt of Ayrton's identity,
for it would have been difficult to suppose that this contract could be
in his hands and not belong to him.

"Now," said Glenarvan, "I appeal to you all for advice as to what is
best to be done. Your advice, Ayrton, would be particularly valuable,
and I should be much obliged if you would give it to us."

"I think, like you," continued Ayrton, "that Captain Grant and his two
sailors were saved from the shipwreck; but, since they have not reached
the English possessions, since they have not reappeared, I doubt not
that their fate was the same as my own, and that they are prisoners of
the natives."

"You repeat, Mr. Ayrton, the arguments that I have already
substantiated," said Paganel. "The shipwrecked seamen are evidently
prisoners of the natives, as they feared. But ought we to suppose that,
like you, they have been carried to the north?"

"It is quite likely, sir," replied Ayrton. "The hostile tribes would
hardly remain in the neighborhood of the English provinces."

"And you, Mr. Ayrton," said Lady Helena, at length, to the
quartermaster, "what would you do?"

"Ah! you have suffered injuries?" inquired Ayrton.

"But the Duncan?" added Ayrton, with singular persistency.

"And, for my part, I never met one," added Ayrton.

Moreover, if Ayrton would consent to join the travelers, to guide them
through the forests, and to the eastern coast, there was another chance
of success. Glenarvan felt the importance of this arrangement, and was
therefore particularly desirous of obtaining the services of Captain
Grant's companion. He inquired of his host whether he was willing for
him to propose to Ayrton to accompany them. Mr. O'Moore consented,
though not without regret at losing so good an assistant.

"Well, Ayrton, will you aid us in our search for the sailors of the
Britannia?"

"Very well, my lord," said Ayrton; "rely on me."

The next day the captain, accompanied by the carpenter and by the
sailors loaded with provisions, returned to the farm of Mr. O'Moore,
who was to assist him in the preparations. All the family were waiting
for him, ready to work under his orders. Ayrton was there, and freely
gave them the benefit of his experience. He and his employer were
agreed on this point, that the ladies ought to make the journey in an
ox-cart, and the gentlemen on horseback. The colonist could procure
them the animals and vehicle.

The vehicle was a cart twenty feet long and covered with an awning,
the whole resting upon four wheels, without spokes, felloes, or tires.
The front wheels were a long way from the hind ones, and were joined
together by a rude contrivance that made it impossible to turn short.
To the body of the cart was attached a pole thirty-five feet long, to
which three pairs of oxen were coupled. The animals, thus arranged,
drew by means of a yoke across their necks, to which the bow was
fastened with an iron pin. It required great skill to manage this long,
narrow, tottering vehicle, and guide the oxen by means of the whip.
But Ayrton had served his apprenticeship at O'Moore's farm, and his
employer guaranteed his dexterity. Upon him, therefore, devolved the
duty of driving.

Having made his arrangements, and given his orders to the carpenter,
Captain Mangles returned on board with the colonist's family, who
wished to pay Lord Glenarvan a visit. Ayrton thought proper to join
them, and about four o'clock the captain crossed the gangway of the
Duncan.

Of course, Glenarvan invited his visitors to dinner, and they willingly
accepted his return hospitality. Mr. O'Moore was amazed. The furniture
of the cabins, the tapestry, the upholstery, and the fancy-work of
maple and ebony excited his admiration. Ayrton, on the contrary, gave
only a secondary attention to these costly luxuries. He first examined
the yacht from a sailor's point of view. He explored the hold; he
went down into the engine-room; he looked at the engine, inquired
its effective power and consumption; he visited the coal-house, the
pantry, and the powder-magazine, and took particular interest in the
gun-room and the mounted cannon in the forecastle. Glenarvan now had to
deal with a man who was a critical judge, as he could see by Ayrton's
keen inquiries. At last the quartermaster finished his exploration by
inspecting the masts and rigging; and, after a few moments of general
review, said:

"Shall I be greatly mistaken," added Ayrton, "if I say that the Duncan
can easily make fifteen knots an hour at full speed?"

"Not even in sailing?" asked Ayrton.

"Thanks, Ayrton," replied Glenarvan; "and now remain on board, and it
will be your own fault if the ship is not all you can desire."

"That Ayrton is an intelligent man," said Paganel to the major.

During dinner, Ayrton gave some interesting information concerning
Australia, with which he was perfectly familiar. He inquired the number
of sailors that Glenarvan intended to take with him in his expedition.
When he learned that only two, Wilson and Mulready, were to accompany
them, he seemed astonished. He advised Glenarvan to form his party of
the best seamen of the Duncan. He even insisted upon this point, which
must have removed all suspicion from the mind of the major.

Ayrton seemed to appreciate this reason, and no longer insisted.

At evening the party separated. Ayrton and O'Moore's family returned to
their home. The horses and cart were to be ready the next day, and the
travelers were to start at eight o'clock in the morning.

Everything was ready. Lady Helena was delighted with her quarters. The
immense cart, with its rude wheels and massive timbers, especially
pleased her. The six oxen yoked in pairs seemed to indicate primeval
simplicity, and were a novel sight. Ayrton, whip in hand, awaited the
orders of his new chief.

[Illustration: Ayrton and Olbinett took their places respectively in
front and in the rear part of the cart, while Glenarvan, the major,
Paganel, Robert, Captain Mangles, and the two sailors, mounted their
horses.]

The signal for departure was now given. Lady Helena and Miss Grant
seated themselves in their compartment, Ayrton and Olbinett took their
places respectively in front and in the rear part of the cart, while
Glenarvan, the major, Paganel, Robert, Captain Mangles, and the two
sailors, all armed with carbines and revolvers, mounted their horses. A
"God bless you" was Mr. O'Moore's parting salute, which was echoed in
chorus by his family. Ayrton uttered a peculiar cry, and started his
long team. The cart moved, the timbers cracked, the axles creaked, and
the farm of the honest hospitable Irishman soon disappeared from view
at the turn of the road.

About four o'clock in the afternoon, Captain Mangles descried, three
miles in advance, an enormous column of dust that spread along the
horizon. What occasioned this? It would have been very difficult to
say. Paganel was inclined to regard it as some phenomenon, for which
his lively imagination already sought a natural cause. But Ayrton
dissipated all his conjectures by declaring that this cloud of dust
proceeded from a drove of cattle.

Meantime the cart had stopped on a carpet of turf whose fringes hung
over the swiftly flowing waters. There was neither raft nor bridge, but
they must cross at all hazard. Ayrton busied himself in searching for
a practicable ford. A quarter of a mile up-stream, the river seemed to
him less deep, and from this point he resolved to reach the other bank.
Various soundings gave a depth of only three feet. The cart could,
therefore, pass over this shallow without running much risk.

"No, my lord," replied Ayrton; "but this passage does not seem to me
dangerous. We can extricate ourselves from any difficulty."

"Well, Ayrton," said Glenarvan, "I trust to you."

The horsemen surrounded the heavy vehicle, and the party boldly entered
the river. Usually, when these fordings are attempted, the carts are
encircled by a ring of empty barrels, which support them on the water.
But here this buoyant girdle was wanting, and it was, therefore,
necessary to confide to the sagacity of the oxen, guided by the
cautious Ayrton. The major and the two sailors dashed through the rapid
current some distance ahead, while Glenarvan and Captain Mangles, one
on each side of the cart, stood ready to assist the ladies, and Paganel
and Robert brought up the rear.

Everything went well till they reached the middle of the river, but
here the depth increased, and the water rose above the felloes. The
oxen, if thrown out of their course, might lose their footing and
overturn the unsteady vehicle. Ayrton exerted himself to the utmost. He
leaped into the water, and, seizing the oxen by the horns, succeeded in
keeping them in the right track.

This mishap required immediate repair. The travelers gazed at each
other in some degree of perplexity, when Ayrton proposed to go to Black
Point Station, twenty miles to the north, and bring a farrier.

"Very well, Ayrton," said Glenarvan. "How much time do you need to make
the journey and return to the encampment?"

After the departure of Ayrton, and during this compulsory halt,
promenades and conversations became the order of the day. There was
an abundance of agreeable surroundings to talk about, and nature
seemed dressed in one of her most attractive garbs. Birds, novel and
varied in their plumage, with flowers such as they had never before
gazed on, were the constant theme of the travelers' remark; and when,
in addition, they had in Mr. Olbinett one who knew how to spread
before them and make the best of all the culinary novelties that were
within reach, a very substantial foundation was possible for the
"feast of reason and the flow of soul" which followed, and for which,
as usual, they were to no small extent indebted to their learned
historico-geographical professor, whose stock of information was as
varied as it was pleasant.

It was not without a certain feeling of apprehension that the major
had seen Ayrton leave the Wimerra to procure a farrier at Black Point
Station. However, he did not breathe a word of his personal suspicions,
but contented himself with exploring the surroundings of the river,
whose tranquillity was undisturbed. As for Glenarvan, his only fear was
to see Ayrton return alone. In the absence of skilled labor, the cart
could not resume its journey, which would be interrupted for several
days perhaps; and his longings for success and eagerness to attain his
end admitted of no delay.

Fortunately, Ayrton had lost neither his time nor his trouble. The
next morning he reappeared at break of day. A man accompanied him, by
profession a farrier. He was a tall, stout fellow, but of a low and
brutish appearance, which did not prepossess one in his favor. However,
this was of little importance, if he knew his business. At all events
his breath was not wasted in idle words.

"I know no more than you, captain," replied Ayrton. "We shall see."

Two hours after, the injuries of the cart were repaired. As for
Glenarvan's horse, he was quickly shod. The farrier had taken care to
bring shoes all prepared. There was a peculiarity about them, however,
which did not escape the major. It was a trefoil rudely carved on the
outer rim. He pointed it out to Ayrton.

At eleven o'clock they arrived at Carlsbrook, quite an important
municipality. Ayrton thought it best to pass by the city without
entering. Glenarvan was of the same opinion; but Paganel, always
eager for something new, desired to visit the place. Accordingly,
the geographer, taking Robert with him as usual, started on his
explorations, while the cart slowly continued its journey. Their
inspection of the town was very rapid, and shortly afterwards they had
joined their companions.

While they were passing through this region, the travelers requested
Paganel to give them some account of its progress, and the geographer,
in compliance with their wishes, had just begun a lecture upon the
civilization of the country, when he was interrupted by a shrill
whistle. The party were not a mile from the railroad. A locomotive,
coming from the south, and going slowly, had stopped just where
the road they were following crossed the iron track. At this point
the railway passes over the Lutton on an iron bridge, and thither
Ayrton directed his cart, preceded by the horsemen. The travelers
were attracted, moreover, by a lively feeling of curiosity, for
a considerable crowd was already rushing towards the bridge. The
inhabitants of the neighboring stations, leaving their houses, and the
shepherds their flocks, lined the sides of the track. Frequent cries
were heard. Some serious event must have taken place to cause such
excitement,--a great accident, perhaps.

On reaching the cart, Glenarvan simply told Lady Helena that a railroad
accident had taken place, without mentioning the part that the convicts
had played in the catastrophe. He reserved this matter that he might
question Ayrton in private. The little party then crossed the track,
not far above the bridge, and resumed their route towards the east.

The party were now approaching the district which, in the years 1851
and 1852, was so much talked of throughout the civilized world,
and attracted from all parts so many reckless adventurers and
fortune-hunters. The line of the thirty-seventh parallel, on which they
were traveling, led them through the diggings and municipality of Mount
Alexander, which was one of the most successful spots for the digger at
the commencement of the gold fever, in consequence of the comparatively
level nature of the ground and the general richness of the soil, so
different from some other localities where only once in a while was
some enormous nugget to be found. As they drew near to the streets of
this hastily-built town, Ayrton and Mulready, who were in charge of the
cart, were sent forward, whilst the others walked through the place to
inspect what there might be of interest, as well as to ascertain what
might be learned concerning the object of their expedition.

But his joy culminated when, after some time spent in the hotel, the
party left the town, and passed through the "diggings," properly so
called. It was difficult to persuade Paganel and Robert--who kept
together--to come on, in order that they might not leave Ayrton and
Mulready too long in suspense. Now the Frenchman would see just the key
that he needed to understand a point not before clear to him; anon you
might see him as in the illustration, when he had picked up a pebble
and was sure that it was in itself so interesting as a mineralogical
specimen that he must treasure it up for the Bank of France, so that
his own land might have at least one part of Australia. All this was
done with such a mingling of childish good-nature and scientific and
national pride that it was useless to do anything but laugh, and an
irrepressible smile came over even the major's features. At length,
however, by drawing him into a lecture, they succeeded in persuading
him to follow them; and, as they left the diggings, he told them the
history of the prophecies, the discovery, and the spread of knowledge
as to the rich auriferous deposits of this part of Australia. He
could give them facts and incidents and dates as to the ingress into
Melbourne, and the exodus therefrom to the diggings, in the year 1852;
he told them how the energy and the love of order which characterize
the English-speaking peoples had reduced to system, method,
subordination, the chaotic surgings and restlessness which marked the
first weeks and months of this new era; and he detailed, as though
he had studied the subject to the entire neglect of other matters,
the working of the system,--how the land was registered, what was the
sum paid in the aggregate, how the taxes were collected, wherein the
system had been found faulty. All this occupied much time, and, before
he had finished, the cart was in sight, in which Lady Helena and Miss
Grant reseated themselves, and for the remainder of the day and the
succeeding night their progress was in the accustomed order.

Only one change had been made in the line of march since leaving
Camden Bridge. The criminal disaster on the railway, when made known
to Ayrton, had induced him to take precautions hitherto needless.
The horsemen were not to lose sight of the cart. During the hours of
encampment one of them was always on guard. Morning and evening the
priming of the fire-arms was renewed. It was certain that a band of
malefactors were scouring the country; and, although nothing gave cause
for immediate suspicion, still it was necessary to be ready for any
emergency.

All day long our travelers pursued their way under these interminable
arches. They met neither quadruped nor human being. A few cockatoos
inhabited the tops of the trees; but at that height they could scarcely
be distinguished, and their chattering was an almost inaudible murmur.
Sometimes a flock of parrots would shoot across a distant vista,
illumining it with a rapid flash of variegated light. But generally a
deep silence reigned in this vast temple of verdure, and the measured
tread of the horses, a few words exchanged now and then in desultory
conversation, the creaking of the cart-wheels, and from time to time a
cry from Ayrton as he urged on his sluggish team, were the only sounds
that disturbed this vast solitude.

Olbinett, according to Paganel's advice, kindled a fire in one of these
tubular trunks. He obtained a draught at once, and the smoke soon
disappeared in the dark mass of foliage. The necessary precautions were
taken for the night, and Ayrton, Mulready, Wilson, and Captain Mangles
watched by turns till sunrise.

"Have they been arrested?" asked Ayrton, quickly.

"So much the worse," added Ayrton.

"Sydney, Jan. 2, 1865.--It will be remembered that on the night of
December 29 an accident took place at Camden Bridge, five miles from
Castlemaine Station, on the Melbourne and Sandhurst Railway, by which
the night express was precipitated at full speed into the Lutton River.
Numerous thefts committed after the accident, and the corpse of the
guard found half a mile above, prove that it was the result of a crime;
and, in accordance with the verdict at the inquest, this crime is to
be attributed to a band of convicts who escaped, six months ago, from
the Perth penitentiary, in Western Australia, as they were about to
be transferred to Norfolk Island. These convicts are twenty-nine in
number, and are commanded by a certain Ben Joyce, a dangerous criminal,
who arrived in Australia several months ago in some way, and upon whom
justice has not yet succeeded in laying hands. The inhabitants of the
cities, and the colonists and squatters of the stations, are warned
to be on their guard, and requested to send to the undersigned any
information which may assist his investigations.

"Before replying," said the major, "I should like to hear Ayrton's
opinion."

"One more remark, my lord," said Ayrton, as they were about to separate.

"Well," replied Ayrton, without further remark.

Just then were heard sounds of voices at some little distance; the oxen
were put in motion, and after proceeding a few hundred paces the party
came suddenly upon an encampment of aborigines, consisting of some
ten or twelve tents, made of strips of bark arranged in the manner of
tiles, and giving shelter to their wretched inhabitants on only one
side. Of these miserable beings there were about thirty, men, women,
and children, dressed in ragged kangaroo-skins. Their first movement
was one of flight; but a few words from Ayrton restored confidence, and
they slowly approached the party of Europeans.

Sometimes the plain was furrowed with winding creeks, bordered by
box-wood, which took their source on the slopes of the Buffalo Range,
a chain of mountains whose picturesque outlines stretched along the
horizon, and which the party resolved to reach that evening. Ayrton
urged on his oxen, and, after a journey of thirty-five miles, they
reached the place. The tent was pitched beneath a great tree. Night had
come, and supper was quickly dispatched; all thought more of sleeping
than of eating, after the fatigues of the day.

The young man modestly returned the geographer's greeting, and then
pointed towards the right to the road they were to take. The horses had
been confided to the care of Ayrton and the sailors, and the travelers
at once betook themselves on foot to Hottam Station, under the guidance
of the two young men.

"That is precisely what happened to his quartermaster, Ayrton," replied
Captain Mangles.

"The Australians are not cruel, madam," replied the young settler:
"Miss Grant may reassure herself on this point. There are many
instances of their kindness; and some Europeans have lived a long time
among them, without having any reason to complain of brutality." These
words corroborated the information previously given by Paganel and
Ayrton.

The sky was dull and lowering, and the rays of the sun struggled
through dense masses of mist. The temperature was, therefore,
endurable; but the journey was difficult on account of the irregularity
of the surface. The unevenness of the plain constantly increased,
and here and there rose mounds, covered with young green gum-trees.
Farther on, these excrescences formed the first slopes of the great
Alps. The ascent was very laborious, as was shown by the efforts of the
oxen, whose yokes cracked under the tension of the heavy vehicle. The
animals panted heavily, and the muscles of their hams were strained
almost to breaking. The axles threatened to give way under the sudden
jolts that Ayrton, with all his skill, could not prevent. The ladies,
however, lost none of their accustomed cheerfulness.

The next day, in spite of the assurances of the confident geographer,
the little party found great difficulty in crossing the mountains. They
were forced to advance at a venture, and descend into deep and narrow
gorges that, for aught they knew, might end in a wall of rock. Ayrton
would doubtless have been eventually nonplused had they not, after an
hour's climbing, caught sight of a tavern on one of the paths of the
mountain.

Glenarvan, followed by Ayrton, entered the tavern. The landlord of
"Bush Inn" was a coarse man, of forbidding appearance, who had to
consider himself as the principal customer for the gin, brandy, and
whisky of his tavern, and scarcely ever saw any one but squatters or
herdsmen.

He replied in an ill-humored way to the questions that were addressed
him; but his answers sufficed to determine Ayrton upon his course.
Glenarvan, however, remunerated the tavern-keeper for the little
trouble they had given him, and was about to leave the inn, when a
placard, affixed to the wall, attracted his attention. It was a notice
of the colonial police, detailing the escape of the convicts from
Perth, and setting a price upon the head of Ben Joyce--a hundred pounds
sterling to any one who should deliver him up.

"And especially worth taking," replied Ayrton. "A hundred pounds! What
a sum! He is not worth it."

"Nor I either," said Ayrton.

But it was an arduous task. More than once the ladies and their
companions had to dismount, and it was often necessary to push the
wheels of the heavy vehicle at some steep ascent, or to hold it
back along the edge of some dangerous precipice. The oxen, as they
could not work to advantage at sudden turns, had frequently to be
unyoked, and the cart blocked to prevent it from sliding back. Ayrton
was repeatedly forced to bring the already exhausted horses to his
assistance.

Whether this exertion was too prolonged, or whether from some other
cause, one of the horses gave out during the ascent. He fell suddenly,
without an instant's warning. It was Mulready's horse; and when the
sailor attempted to help him up, he found that he was dead. Ayrton
examined the animal carefully, but did not seem to understand the cause
of this sudden death.

All were impatient to gain their destination, the Pacific Ocean,
where the Britannia had been wrecked. There only could traces of the
shipwrecked seamen be found, and not in these desert regions. Ayrton
urged Lord Glenarvan to send an order to the Duncan to repair to the
coast, that he might have at his disposal all the aid possible in his
search. In his opinion they ought to take advantage of the Lucknow
road, which would lead them to Melbourne. Afterwards this might be
difficult, for highways leading directly to the capital would be
absolutely wanting.

Glenarvan was undecided, and perhaps would have sent the order that
Ayrton so particularly desired, if the major had not opposed this plan
with great energy. He explained that Ayrton's presence was necessary
to the expedition; that on approaching the coast the country would be
unknown; that, if chance set them on the track of Captain Grant, the
quartermaster would be more capable than any one else of following it;
in short, that he alone could point out the place where the Britannia
was lost.

The major carried his point, and it was therefore decided that they
should proceed to Twofold Bay. MacNabb noticed that Ayrton seemed quite
disappointed, but he said nothing, and, according to his custom, kept
his thoughts to himself.

Captain Mangles and Glenarvan anxiously examined the remaining horses:
perhaps preventives might be found against new calamities. No sign
of disease, however, could be detected. The animals were in perfect
health, and bravely endured the hardships of the journey. Glenarvan,
therefore, was inclined to think that this mysterious epidemic would
have no more victims. This was Ayrton's opinion too, who declared that
he could not at all understand the cause of the frightful mortality.

The next day they made an excellent beginning, and accomplished fifteen
miles. Everything led them to hope that they would encamp that evening
on the banks of the Snowy River. Evening came, and a fog, clearly
defined against the horizon, marked the course of the long-looked-for
stream. A forest of tall trees was seen at a bend in the road, behind
a moderate elevation. Ayrton guided his oxen towards the tall trunks
dimly discerned in the shadow, and was just passing the boundary of the
wood, when the cart sank into the earth to the hubs.

"We are fast in the mud," replied Ayrton.

"That is the best plan," answered Ayrton. "To-morrow, at daybreak, we
can see to extricate ourselves."

Ayrton succeeded with difficulty in extricating his three oxen from
the mud, in which they had by this time sunk to their flanks. The
quartermaster picketed them with the four horses, and would allow no
one to give them their fodder. This service he performed himself with
great exactness, and that evening Glenarvan observed that his care was
redoubled, for which he thanked him, as the preservation of the team
was of paramount importance.

More than once Mulready, Ayrton, and Captain Mangles went to ascertain
the height of the rushing waters, and returned drenched from head to
foot.

Glenarvan, the two sailors, the captain, and Ayrton then entered the
wood, where the animals had passed the night.

It was a tall forest of gloomy gum-trees. Nothing met the eye but dead
trunks, widely separated, which had been destitute of their bark for
centuries. Not a bird built its nest on these lofty skeletons; not a
leaf trembled on the dry branches, that rattled together like a bundle
of dry bones. Glenarvan, as he walked on, gazed at the leaden sky,
against which the branches of the gum-trees were sharply defined. To
Ayrton's great astonishment, there was no trace of the horses and oxen
in the place where he had left them. The fettered animals, however,
could not have gone far.

They searched for them in the wood, but failed to find them. Ayrton
then returned to the banks of the river, which was bordered by
magnificent mimosas. He uttered a cry well known to his oxen, but
there was no answer. The quartermaster seemed very anxious, and his
companions glanced at each other in dismay.

Glenarvan, Mulready, and Ayrton rushed after him, and soon shared his
astonishment. Two oxen and three horses lay upon the ground, stricken
like the others. Their bodies were already cold, and a flock of hungry
crows, croaking in the mimosas, waited for their unexpected prey.

"What is the matter, Wilson?" said Lord Glenarvan, scarcely able to
control himself. "We can do nothing. Ayrton, bring the ox and horse
that are left. They must extricate us from the difficulty."

Ayrton took charge of the ox, and Mulready of the horse, and the party
returned along the winding banks of the river. Half an hour after,
Paganel, MacNabb, Lady Helena, and Miss Grant were told the state of
affairs.

"By my faith," the major could not help exclaiming, "it is a pity,
Ayrton, that you did not shoe all our animals on crossing the Wimerra."

"Why so, sir?" asked Ayrton.

MacNabb compressed his lips, as if he would repress the words ready
to burst from them. Glenarvan, the captain, and Lady Helena seemed to
expect that he would finish his sentence; but he remained silent, and
walked towards the cart, which Ayrton was now examining.

"No," said Lady Helena; "Major MacNabb must have suspicions of Ayrton."

"What suspicions?" asked Glenarvan. "Does he suppose him capable of
killing our horses and oxen? For what purpose, pray? Are not Ayrton's
interests identical with ours?"

Ayrton and the two sailors were still trying to extricate the cart.
The ox and the horse, yoked side by side, were pulling with all their
strength; the traces were stretched almost to breaking, and the bows
threatened to give way to the strain. Wilson and Mulready pushed at
the wheels, while the quartermaster, with voice and whip, urged on the
ill-matched team. But the heavy vehicle did not stir. The clay, now
dry, held it as if it had been cemented.

Captain Mangles wetted the clay to make it yield, but to no purpose:
the cart was immovable. Unless the vehicle was taken to pieces, they
must give up the idea of getting it out of the quagmire. As tools
were wanting, of course they could not undertake such a task. Ayrton,
however, who seemed determined to overcome the difficulty at any cost,
was about to renew his exertions, when Lord Glenarvan stopped him.

"Enough, Ayrton! enough!" said he. "We must be careful of the ox and
horse that remain. If we are to continue our journey on foot, one can
carry the two ladies and the other the provisions. They may do us good
service yet."

"And the Duncan?" asked Ayrton. "Do you not think it advisable to order
her to the bay?"

"Four or five days!" interposed Ayrton, shaking his head; "say fifteen
or twenty, captain, if you do not wish to regret your error hereafter."

Ayrton's tone was that of a man who is thoroughly acquainted with his
subject. Paganel, towards whom questioning glances were turned, nodded
approvingly at the words of the quartermaster.

"I may add," resumed Ayrton, "that the principal obstacles do not
proceed from the roughness of the journey. We must cross the Snowy,
and, very probably, have to wait for the subsidence of the waters."

"I think not," replied Ayrton. "This morning I searched in vain for a
practicable one. It is unusual to find a river so much swollen at this
season; it is a fatality against which I am powerless."

"Broad and deep, madam," answered Ayrton; "a mile in breadth, with a
strong current. A good swimmer could not cross it without danger."

"What do you think, Ayrton?" asked Glenarvan.

Ayrton meditated for a few moments, and then said, evasively:

"That is no answer, Ayrton," continued Glenarvan. "Tell us your plan,
and we will discuss it. What do you propose?"

"In the mean time," continued Ayrton, "either the waters of the Snowy
will have subsided, which will enable us to find a practicable ford, or
we shall have to resort to a boat, and shall have time to construct it.
This, my lord, is the plan which I submit to your approval."

"Very well, Ayrton," replied Glenarvan; "your idea deserves to be
seriously considered. Its greatest objection is the delay it will
cause; but it spares us severe hardships, and perhaps real dangers.
What do you think, friends?"

"Since you ask my opinion," answered the major, "I will give it to you
very frankly. Ayrton seems to me to have spoken like a wise and prudent
man, and I advocate his proposition."

This answer was rather unexpected; for hitherto MacNabb had always
opposed Ayrton's ideas on this subject. Ayrton, too, was surprised,
and cast a quick glance at the major. Paganel, Lady Helena, and the
sailors had been favorably disposed to the quartermaster's project, and
no longer hesitated after MacNabb's declaration. Glenarvan, therefore,
announced that Ayrton's plan was adopted.

"On horseback," continued Ayrton. "There is one good horse left. It
will be a journey of but four days. Add two days for the Duncan to
reach the bay, twenty-four hours for the return to the encampment, and
in a week the messenger will be back again with the crew."

Wilson, Mulready, Captain Mangles, Paganel, and Robert offered
themselves immediately. The captain particularly insisted that this
mission should be confided to him; but Ayrton, who had not yet
finished, resumed the conversation, and said:

"Well said!" replied Glenarvan. "You are a brave and intelligent man,
Ayrton, and will succeed."

The quartermaster was evidently more capable than any one else of
fulfilling this difficult mission. Captain Mangles raised one final
objection, that Ayrton's presence was necessary to enable them to
find traces of the Brittania or Captain Grant; but the major observed
that they should remain encamped on the banks of the Snowy till the
messenger's return, that it was not proposed to resume the search
without him, and that consequently his absence could be in no way
prejudicial to their interests.

"Well then, Ayrton, start," said Glenarvan. "Make haste, and return to
the encampment by way of Eden."

He ordered the mate of the Duncan to repair without delay to Twofold
Bay, and recommended the quartermaster to him as a man in whom he could
place entire confidence. As soon as he arrived at the bay, he was to
send a detachment of sailors under the command of Ayrton.

He had just reached this part of his letter, when the major, who had
been looking over his shoulder, asked him, in a singular tone, how he
wrote the word Ayrton.

"That is a mistake," said the major coolly. "It is pronounced Ayrton,
but it is written 'Ben Joyce'!"

The sound of the name of Ben Joyce fell upon the party like a
thunderbolt. Ayrton suddenly sprang to his feet. In his hand was a
revolver. A report was heard; and Glenarvan fell, struck by a bullet.

These events had transpired with the rapidity of lightning. Captain
Mangles attentively watched the edge of the wood; but the reports
suddenly ceased on the arrival of Ben Joyce, and a profound silence
succeeded the noisy fusillade. A few wreaths of white smoke were still
curling up between the branches of the gum-trees, but the tall tufts of
gastrolobium were motionless and all signs of attack had disappeared.

The major and captain scoured the surrounding country. But from the
edge of the wood to the banks of the Snowy they did not meet with a
single convict. Ben Joyce's band seemed to have flown away, like a
flock of mischievous birds. This disappearance was too strange to
inspire a perfect security. They therefore resolved to keep on the
watch. The cart, which was a really immovable fortress, became the
centre of the encampment, and two men kept guard, relieving each other
every hour.

Lady Helena and Mary Grant's first care had been to dress Glenarvan's
wound. At the very moment that her husband fell, from Ben Joyce's
bullet, in her terror she had rushed towards him. Then, controlling
her emotion, this courageous woman had assisted Glenarvan to the cart.
Here the shoulder of the wounded man was laid bare, and the major
perceived that the ball had lacerated the flesh, causing no other
injury. Neither bones nor large muscles seemed affected. The wound bled
considerably, but Glenarvan, by moving the fingers of his hand and
fore-arm, encouraged his friends to expect a favorable result. When his
wound was dressed, he no longer desired any attention, and explanations
followed. The travelers, except Wilson and Mulready, who were keeping
guard outside, had taken seats as well as possible in the cart, and the
major was requested to speak.

But how had MacNabb recognized this Ben Joyce in the quartermaster
Ayrton? Here was the mystery that all wished to solve; and the major
explained.

Since the day of his meeting with Ayrton he had suspected him. Two or
three almost insignificant circumstances, a glance exchanged between
the quartermaster and the farrier at Wimerra River, Ayrton's hesitation
to pass through the towns and villages, his strong wish to order the
Duncan to the coast, the strange death of the animals confided to his
care, and, finally, a want of frankness in his actions,--all these
facts, gradually noticed, had roused the major's suspicions.

"Then they were silent," added MacNabb, "and departed. I wanted to know
more: I followed them. The conversation soon began again. 'A cunning
man, this Ben Joyce,' said the farrier; 'a famous quartermaster, with
his invented shipwreck. If his plan succeeds, it will be a stroke of
fortune. Devilish Ayrton! Call him Ben Joyce, for he has well earned
his name.' These rascals then left the wood of gum-trees. I knew what
I wished, and returned to the encampment with the certainty that all
the convicts in Australia are not reformed, in spite of Paganel's
arguments."

"Then," said Glenarvan, whose face was pale with anger, "Ayrton has
brought us here to rob and assassinate us?"

"These," replied he, in his calm voice, "are the proofs that can be
derived from this obscure state of affairs. In my opinion this man's
real name is Ayrton. Ben Joyce is his fighting title. It is certain
that he knows Harry Grant, and has been quartermaster on board the
Britannia. These facts, proved already by the precise details given
by Ayrton, are still further corroborated by the conversation of the
convicts that I have related. Let us not, therefore, be led astray
by vain conjectures, but only be certain that Ayrton is Ben Joyce, a
sailor of the Britannia, now chief of a band of convicts."

"The police do not even know the identity of Ayrton and Ben Joyce,"
said Captain Mangles.

Everything possible had been said concerning Ben Joyce. His past had
just been reviewed by the major, and the wretch appeared as he was,--a
bold and formidable criminal. His intentions had been clearly proved,
and required, on the part of Glenarvan, extreme vigilance. Fortunately,
there was less to fear from the detected bandit than the secret traitor.

The discovery of Ayrton's treachery destroyed all hope. The convict, to
entice Glenarvan on, had invented a shipwreck. In their conversation,
overheard by MacNabb, his accomplices had clearly confessed it. The
Britannia had never been wrecked on the reefs of Twofold Bay! Harry
Grant had never set foot on the Australian continent!

In the mean time Glenarvan had joined Mulready and Wilson, who were on
guard without. A deep silence reigned on the plain lying between the
wood and the river. Heavy clouds covered the vault of the sky. In this
deadened and torpid atmosphere the least sound would have been clearly
transmitted; but nothing was heard. Ben Joyce and his band must have
fled to a considerable distance; for flocks of birds that sported on
the low branches of the trees, several kangaroos peacefully browsing on
the young shoots, and a pair of cassowaries, whose unsuspecting heads
were thrust between the tall bushes, proved that the presence of man
did not disturb these peaceful solitudes.

"They cannot have been in sufficient force to attack us," added
Mulready. "This Ben Joyce probably intended to recruit some bandits,
like himself, among the bushrangers that wander at the foot of the
Alps."

"But," added he, "we ought not to remain here without making any
attempt. What we wished to do before Ayrton's treason is still more
necessary now."

"But it is a perilous venture, John," said Glenarvan. "Aside from the
dangers of this journey of two hundred miles across an unknown country,
all the roads may be guarded by Ben Joyce's accomplices."

"I know it, my lord; but I know, too, that our situation cannot be
prolonged. Ayrton only asked eight days' absence to bring back the crew
of the Duncan. But I will return in six days to the banks of the Snowy.
What are your lordship's orders?"

This resolution taken, he occupied himself with giving Mulready the
necessary directions for reaching Melbourne, and, with the map before
him, marked out his course. All the trails of the prairie converged
towards the Lucknow road, which, after extending straight southward to
the coast, suddenly turned in the direction towards Melbourne. It was
simply necessary to follow this, and not attempt to cross the unknown
country. Mulready could not, therefore, go astray. As for dangers, they
lay only a few miles beyond the encampment, where Ben Joyce and his
band were probably lying in wait. This point once passed, Mulready was
sure he could easily distance the convicts and accomplish his important
mission.

However, Glenarvan seemed unwilling to yield to these reasons. His
hand played nervously with his rifle. He walked to and fro around the
cart; he listened to the least sound; he strove to pierce the dismal
obscurity. The thought that one of his friends was mortally wounded,
helplessly abandoned, calling in vain upon those for whose sake he
had sacrificed himself, tortured him. MacNabb feared that he should
not succeed in restraining him, that Glenarvan, carried away by his
feelings, would cast himself into the power of Ben Joyce.

The major repeated these words, and glanced at his companions. What did
Mulready mean? Ben Joyce had attacked the sailor, but why? Was it not
simply for the purpose of preventing him from reaching the Duncan? This
letter--Glenarvan examined the sailor's pockets. The letter addressed
to Tom Austin was gone.

Captain Mangles, Paganel, and Glenarvan took a tour of exploration
around the camp. They traversed the path still marked with blood, but
found no trace of Ben Joyce or his band. They went to the place where
the attack had been made. Here two corpses lay on the ground, shot
by Mulready. One was the farrier of Black Point. His face, which had
mortified, was a horrible sight.

On leaving the encampment, Mulready had followed one of the paths
indicated by Paganel. He hastened, as much at least as the darkness of
the night permitted him. According to his estimate, he had traveled a
distance of about two miles, when several men--five, he thought--sprang
to his horse's head. The animal reared. Mulready seized his revolver
and fired. He thought that two of his assailants fell. By the flash of
the report, he recognized Ben Joyce, but that was all. He had not time
to fully discharge his weapon. A violent blow was struck upon his right
side, which brought him to the ground. However, he had not yet lost
consciousness. The assassins believed him dead. He felt them search
him. Then a conversation ensued. "I have the letter," said one of them.
"Give it to me," replied Ben Joyce; "and now the Duncan is ours!"

"'Now, you others,' said Ben Joyce, 'catch the horse. In two days I
shall be on board the Duncan, and in six at Twofold Bay. There is the
place of meeting. The lord's party will be still fast in the marshes
of the Snowy. Cross the river at Kemple Pier bridge, go to the coast,
and wait for me. I will find means to bring you on board. With the
crew once at sea, and a vessel like the Duncan, we shall be masters
of the Indian Ocean.' 'Hurrah for Ben Joyce!' cried the convicts.
Mulready's horse was then led up, and Ben Joyce disappeared at a gallop
on the Lucknow road, while the band proceeded southeastward to the
Snowy River. Mulready, although severely wounded, had strength to drag
himself within two hundred paces of the encampment, where we picked him
up almost dead. This," added MacNabb, "is Mulready's sad story. You
understand now why the courageous sailor wished so much to speak."

"Yes, for Ben Joyce will surprise the vessel," replied the major, "and
then----"

"We will take turns in carrying him. Shall I give up my defenceless
crew to Ben Joyce's band?"

This proposal was accepted, and the captain and Paganel prepared to
start immediately. They were to follow along the bank of the river till
they came to the place indicated by Ben Joyce, and keep out of sight
of the convicts, who were probably lying in wait. These two courageous
men accordingly, well furnished with arms and provisions, set out, and
soon disappeared among the tall rushes of the river.

It was not the time to despair, but to act. If Kemple Pier bridge was
destroyed, they must cross the Snowy at all events, and reach Twofold
Bay before Ben Joyce's band. They lost no time, therefore, in vain
words; but the next day Captain Mangles and Glenarvan went to examine
the river, preparatory to a passage.

Unfortunately, this was not possible, either that day or the next. At
seeing himself thus detained, Glenarvan despaired. Lady Helena and the
major tried in vain to pacify and exhort him to patience. Patience!
when, at that moment perhaps, Ben Joyce was going on board the yacht,
when the Duncan was weighing anchor and steaming towards that fatal
coast, to which every hour brought her nearer!

Two days were wasted in this way. The major and Glenarvan went five
miles up stream without finding a practicable ford. Everywhere was the
same impetuosity, the same tumultuous rush of water; all the southern
slopes of the mountains had poured their liquid torrents into this
single stream. They were forced, therefore, to give up any hope of
saving the Duncan. Five days had passed since Ben Joyce's departure,
the yacht was probably that very moment at the coast, in the hands of
the convicts.

"Listen to me, my lord," continued Captain Mangles. "I know Tom Austin.
He was to execute your orders, and start as soon as his departure was
possible. Who knows whether the Duncan was ready, or her injuries
repaired, on the arrival of Ben Joyce at Melbourne? Supposing the
yacht could not put to sea, and suffered one or two days of delay?"

The dispatch fell from Glenarvan's hands. There was no more doubt! The
honest Scotch yacht, in Ben Joyce's hands, had become a pirate-vessel!

During the afternoon, Glenarvan wished to visit once more the supposed
place of the shipwreck. Ayrton had certainly been the quartermaster of
the Britannia, and the vessel might really have been lost on that part
of the coast. And there, at all events, the Duncan had fallen into the
hands of the convicts. Had there been a fight? Perhaps they would find
on the beach traces of a struggle. If the crew had perished in the
waves, would not the bodies have been cast ashore?

Only one duty remained to be fulfilled,--to inform the constable of
the events that had just transpired, which was done the same evening.
The magistrate, Thomas Banks, could scarcely conceal his satisfaction
at making out the official record. He was simply delighted at the
departure of Ben Joyce and his band. The whole village shared his joy.
The convicts had left Australia because of a new crime; but, at all
events, they had gone. This important news was immediately telegraphed
to the authorities of Melbourne and Sydney.

"Yes, my lord. We should try in vain. We should be captured, at the
mercy of the wretches. Ben Joyce has shown that he does not hesitate at
a crime. I should sell my life dearly. We would defend ourselves to the
last extremity. Well! But, then, think of Lady Helena and Mary Grant!"

However, before thinking of fatigue, or the imperative calls of hunger
and thirst, Glenarvan questioned Tom Austin concerning his presence in
these waters. Why was the Duncan on the eastern coast of New Zealand?
Why was she not in the hands of Ben Joyce? By what providential working
had God restored her to the fugitives? These were the questions that
were hurriedly addressed to Tom Austin. The old sailor did not know
which to answer first. He therefore concluded to listen only to Lord
Glenarvan, and reply to him.

"Of course. Did not Ben Joyce come on board?"

"I do not know Ben Joyce; I have never seen him."

"Exactly; it was sent by a convict, Ben Joyce."

"No; by the sailor called Ayrton, quartermaster of the Britannia."

"Yes, Ayrton or Ben Joyce; it is the same person. Well, what did the
letter say?"

"No, madam, pardon me," returned the sailor; "no, it is not possible! I
am not mistaken. Ayrton also read the letter, and he, on the contrary,
wished to go to Australia."

"I mean," he replied, "that when the quartermaster, Ayrton, learned,
the day after our departure, the Duncan's destination----"

"Ayrton!" cried Glenarvan. "Is he on board?"

"Ayrton here!" repeated Glenarvan, glancing at Captain Mangles.

In an instant, with the swiftness of lightning, Ayrton's conduct, his
long-contrived treachery, Glenarvan's wound, the attack upon Mulready,
their sufferings in the marshes of the Snowy, all the wretch's deeds,
flashed upon the minds of the two men. And now, by a strange fatality,
the convict was in their power.

"Because, when Ayrton saw that the yacht was sailing for New Zealand,
he flew into a passion; because he attempted to force me to change the
ship's course; because he threatened me; and, finally, because he urged
my men to a mutiny. I saw that he was a dangerous person, and was
compelled, therefore, to take precautions against him."

At this moment Glenarvan and Captain Mangles were summoned to the
saloon. Breakfast, which they so much needed, was ready. They took
seats at the table, but did not speak of Ayrton.

"It is only to confront him, Helena," replied Glenarvan. "Remain,
if you can. Ben Joyce should see himself face to face with all his
intended victims."

Ayrton soon made his appearance. He crossed the deck with a confident
step, and ascended the poop-stairs. His eyes had a sullen look, his
teeth were set, and his fists clinched convulsively. His bearing
displayed neither exultation nor humility. As soon as he was in Lord
Glenarvan's presence, he folded his arms, and calmly and silently
waited to be questioned:

"Ayrton," said Glenarvan, "here we all are, as you see, on board the
Duncan, that you would have surrendered to Ben Joyce's accomplices."

However, he made no reply. Glenarvan waited patiently, but Ayrton still
persisted in maintaining an obstinate silence.

"Speak, Ayrton; what have you to say?" continued Glenarvan.

But Glenarvan had resolved to be patient. A powerful motive urged
him to ascertain certain circumstances of Ayrton's mysterious life,
especially as regarded Harry Grant and the Britannia. He therefore
resumed his inquiries, speaking with extreme mildness, and imposing the
most perfect calmness upon the violent agitation of his heart.

"I hope, Ayrton," continued he, "that you will not refuse to answer
certain questions that I desire to ask you. And, first, am I to call
you Ayrton or Ben Joyce? Are you the quartermaster of the Britannia?"

Ayrton remained unmoved, watching the coast, deaf to every question.
Glenarvan, whose eye flashed with some inward emotion, continued to
question him.

"Listen to me, Ayrton," resumed Glenarvan. "It is for your interest to
speak. We may reward a frank confession, which is your only resort. For
the last time, will you answer my questions?"

Ayrton turned his head towards Glenarvan, and looked him full in the
face.

"Easy, my lord?" continued the quartermaster, in a sneering tone.
"Your lordship seems to me very hasty. I declare that the best judge
in Westminster Hall would be puzzled to establish my identity. Who can
say why I came to Australia, since Captain Grant is no longer here to
inform you? Who can prove that I am that Ben Joyce described by the
police, since they have never laid hands upon me, and my companions are
at liberty? Who, except you, can charge me, not to say with a crime,
but even with a culpable action?"

[Illustration: Ayrton soon made his appearance. He crossed the deck
with a confident step, and ascended the poop-stairs.]

Ayrton had grown animated while speaking, but soon relapsed into his
former indifference. He doubtless imagined that this declaration would
end the examination: but Glenarvan resumed, and said:

"Ayrton, I am not a judge charged with trying you. This is not my
business. It is important that our respective positions should be
clearly defined. I ask nothing that can implicate you, for that is the
part of justice. But you know what search I am pursuing, and, with a
word, you can put me on the track I have lost. Will you speak?"

Ayrton shook his head, like a man determined to keep silent.

"Ayrton," said Glenarvan, in almost a suppliant tone, "will you, at
least, if you know where Captain Grant is, tell his poor children, who
are only waiting for a word from your lips?"

Since Glenarvan had failed to overcome Ayrton's obstinacy, what was
to be done? Evidently to follow the plan formed at Eden, of returning
to England, and resuming hereafter this unsuccessful enterprise, for
all traces of the Britannia now seemed irrevocably lost. The document
admitted of no new interpretation. There was no other country on the
line of the thirty-seventh parallel, and the only way was to sail for
home.

It was a sad return for these brave searchers, who had left the shores
of Scotland with such hope and confidence. To the joyous cries that
had saluted Glenarvan on his return succeeded profound dejection. Each
confined himself to the solitude of his cabin, and rarely appeared on
deck. All, even the loquacious Paganel, were mournful and silent. If
Glenarvan spoke of beginning his search again, the geographer shook
his head like a man who has no more hope, for he seemed convinced as
to the fate of the shipwrecked sailors. Yet there was one man on board
who could have informed them about this catastrophe, but whose silence
was still prolonged. There was no doubt that the rascally Ayrton knew,
if not the actual situation of the captain, at least the place of the
shipwreck. Probably Harry Grant, if found, would be a witness against
him; hence he persisted in his silence, and was greatly enraged,
especially towards the sailors who would accuse him of an evil design.

Several times Glenarvan renewed his attempts with the quartermaster.
Promises and threats were useless. Ayrton's obstinacy was carried
so far, and was so inexplicable, that the major came to the belief
that he knew nothing; which opinion was shared by the geographer and
corroborated his own ideas in regard to Captain Grant.

But if Ayrton knew nothing, why did he not plead his ignorance? It
could not turn against him, while his silence increased the difficulty
of forming a new plan. Ought they to infer the presence of Harry Grant
in Australia from meeting the quartermaster on that continent? At all
events, they must induce Ayrton to explain on this subject.

Lady Helena, seeing her husband's failures, now suggested an attempt,
in her turn, to persuade the quartermaster. Where a man had failed,
perhaps a woman could succeed by her gentle entreaty. Glenarvan,
knowing the tact of his young wife, gave his hearty approval. Ayrton
was, accordingly, brought to Lady Helena's boudoir. Mary Grant was to
be present at the interview, for the young girl's influence might also
be great, and Lady Helena would not neglect any chance of success.

For an hour the two ladies were closeted with the quartermaster, but
nothing resulted from this conference. What they said, the arguments
they used to draw out the convict's secret, all the details of this
examination, remained unknown. Moreover, when Ayrton left them they did
not appear to have succeeded, and their faces betokened real despair.

But Lady Helena did not consider herself defeated. She wished to
struggle to the last with this heartless man, and the next day she went
herself to Ayrton's cabin, to avoid the scene that his appearance on
deck occasioned.

"You desired to speak to me, Ayrton?" said Glenarvan.

Ayrton spoke calmly. Glenarvan gazed at him steadily, and then sent
word to MacNabb and Paganel, who at once obeyed his summons.

Ayrton reflected for a few moments, and then said:

Glenarvan, who was accustomed to Ayrton's manners, betrayed no
surprise, although a matter of business between this man and himself
seemed strange.

"This is it," replied Ayrton. "You desire to know from me certain
circumstances which may be useful to you. I desire to obtain from you
certain advantages which will be valuable to me. Now, I will make an
exchange, my lord. Do you agree or not?"

Ayrton bowed, showing that he understood the distinction.

"Yes, Ayrton; it is only justice."

"No, Ayrton, I cannot set you at liberty."

"Ayrton, if I grant your request, will you tell me all that it is for
my interest to know?"

"I will trust you, Ayrton," said Glenarvan, simply.

Ayrton had a reply for everything. He met all difficulties, and
produced unanswerable arguments against himself. As was seen, he
strove to treat in his business with good faith. It was impossible for
a person to surrender with more perfect confidence, and yet he found
means to advance still further in this disinterested course.

"Go on, Ayrton," replied Glenarvan.

However that may be, this avowal of Ayrton, who surrendered himself
without security, singularly affected his hearers, especially when he
added, in conclusion:

"No matter," replied Glenarvan; "I accept your proposal, Ayrton. You
have my word that you shall be landed at one of the islands of the
Pacific."

"We have no questions to ask you," rejoined Glenarvan. "Tell us what
you know, Ayrton, and, in the first place, who you are."

"Gentlemen," replied he, "I am really Tom Ayrton, quartermaster of the
Britannia. I left Glasgow in Captain Grant's ship on the 12th of March,
1861. For fourteen months we traversed together the Pacific, seeking
some favorable place to found a Scottish colony. Harry Grant was a man
capable of performing great deeds, but frequently serious disputes
arose between us. His character did not harmonize with mine. I could
not yield; but with Harry Grant, when his resolution is taken, all
resistance is impossible. He is like iron towards himself and others.
However, I dared to mutiny, and attempted to involve the crew and gain
possession of the vessel. Whether I did right or wrong is of little
importance. However it may be, Captain Grant did not hesitate to land
me, April 8, 1862, on the west coast of Australia."

"Australia!" exclaimed the major, interrupting Ayrton's story. "Then
you left the Britannia before her arrival at Callao, where the last
news of her was dated?"

"Go on, Ayrton," said Glenarvan.

"I found myself, therefore, abandoned on an almost desert coast, but
only twenty miles from the penitentiary of Perth, the capital of
Western Australia. Wandering along the shore, I met a band of convicts
who had just escaped. I joined them. You will spare me, my lord, the
account of my life for two years and a half. It is enough to know that
I became chief of the runaways, under the name of Ben Joyce. In the
month of September, 1864, I made my appearance at the Irishman's farm,
and was received as a servant under my true name of Ayrton. Here I
waited till an opportunity should be offered to gain possession of a
vessel. This was my great object. Two months later the Duncan arrived.
During your visit at the farm you related, my lord, the whole story of
Captain Grant. I then learned what I had not known, the Britannia's
stoppage at Callao, the last news of her, dated June, 1862, two months
after my abandonment, the finding of the document, the shipwreck of the
vessel, and finally the important reasons you had for seeking Captain
Grant in Australia. I did not hesitate, but resolved to appropriate
the Duncan,--a marvelous ship, that would have distanced the best of
the British navy. However, there were serious injuries to be repaired.
I therefore let her start for Melbourne, and offered myself to you in
my real character of quartermaster, volunteering to guide you to the
scene of the shipwreck, which I falsely located on the eastern coast
of Australia. Thus followed at a distance and sometimes preceded by
my band of convicts, I conducted your party across the province of
Victoria. My companions committed a useless crime at Camden Bridge,
since the Duncan, once at Twofold Bay, could not have escaped me, and
with it I should have been master of the ocean. I brought you thus
unsuspectingly as far as the Snowy River. The horses and oxen fell dead
one by one, poisoned by the gastrolobium. I entangled the cart in the
marshes. At my suggestion----but you know the rest, my lord, and can
be certain that, except for Mr. Paganel's absent-mindedness, I should
now be commander on board the Duncan. Such is my story, gentlemen. My
disclosures, unfortunately, cannot set you on the track of Captain
Grant, and you see that in dealing with me you have made a bad bargain."

"Continue, Ayrton," said Glenarvan. "The least sign may set us on the
track."

"Well, Ayrton," continued Glenarvan, "you have kept your word, and I
will keep mine. We will decide on what island of the Pacific you shall
be abandoned."

"Oh, it matters little to me," answered Ayrton.

As we have remarked, the geographer, although so loquacious and
excitable usually, had scarcely spoken during Ayrton's examination. He
had listened in total silence. But this last word that he had uttered
was worth more than all the others, and startled Glenarvan at once.

"Listen first, MacNabb, and shrug your shoulders afterwards. I did
not speak before, because you would not have believed me. Besides, it
was useless. But if I speak to-day, it is because Ayrton's opinion
corroborates mine."

The crew soon learned that Ayrton's disclosures had not thrown light
upon the situation of Captain Grant. The despair on board was profound,
for they had relied on the quartermaster, who, however, knew nothing
that could put the Duncan on the track of the Britannia. The yacht
therefore continued on the same course, and the only question now was
to choose the island on which to leave Ayrton.

If anywhere absolute isolation was to be found on earth, it was here,
afar from the ocean's traveled highways. Its situation was made known
to Ayrton, who consented to live there; and the vessel was accordingly
headed towards the island. Two days later the lookout hailed land on
the horizon. It was Maria Theresa, low, long, and scarcely emerging
from the waves, appearing like some enormous sea-monster. Thirty miles
still lay between it and the yacht, whose prow cut the waves with
such speed that soon the island grew distinct. The sun, now sinking
towards the west, defined its outlines in glowing light. Several slight
elevations were tinged with the last rays of the day.

"We will seek some other deserted island," resumed Glenarvan, who could
not help smiling at MacNabb's delicacy. "I promised Ayrton his life,
and I will keep my promise."

It was not long before Glenarvan related Ayrton's story to the captain,
who confirmed the quartermaster's declaration in regard to his having
been abandoned on the Australian coast.

But before Ayrton was transferred to Tabor Island, Harry Grant wished
to show his new friends the bounds of his habitation. He invited them
to visit his house, and sit for once at his table. Glenarvan and his
companions cordially accepted the invitation, and Robert and Mary
were not a little desirous to see those haunts where their father had
doubtless at times bewailed his fate. A boat was manned, and the whole
party soon disembarked on the shores of the island.

"That rascal Ayrton will have no cause to complain," cried he in his
enthusiasm. "The island is a paradise!"

They returned to the vessel; and, as he expected to sail the same day,
Glenarvan gave orders for the quartermaster's landing. Ayrton was
brought on deck, and found himself in the presence of Harry Grant.

"It is I, Ayrton," said he.

"Yes, captain," replied Ayrton, without betraying any astonishment at
Harry Grant's appearance. "Well, I am not sorry to see you again in
good health."

"It seems, Ayrton, that I made a mistake in landing you on an inhabited
coast."

"May it be so," rejoined Ayrton, in a calm tone.

"Do you still adhere, Ayrton, to this determination to be abandoned?"

"Thank you, my lord!" replied Ayrton, simply.

Such were the last words exchanged between Glenarvan and the
quartermaster. The boat was ready, and Ayrton embarked. Captain Mangles
had previously sent to the island several cases of preserved food, some
clothes, tools, weapons, and a supply of powder and shot. The abandoned
man could therefore employ his time to advantage. Nothing was wanting,
not even books, foremost among which was a Bible.

At this moment the boat, commanded by Captain Mangles, started. Ayrton
raised his hat and gave a grave salute. Glenarvan and the crew returned
this last farewell, as if to a man about to die, as he departed, in a
profound silence.

On reaching the shore, Ayrton leaped upon the sand, and the boat
returned. It was then four o'clock in the afternoon, and from the upper
deck the passengers could see the quartermaster, with folded arms,
standing motionless as a statue, on a rock, and gazing at the vessel.