Mary and Robert Grant were the only children of Captain Harry Grant,
whose wife had died at the birth of Robert, and during his long
voyages his children were left to the care of his good old cousin.
Captain Grant was a hardy sailor, a man well acquainted with his
profession, and a good negotiator, combining thus a twofold aptitude
for his calling commercially. His home was at Dundee, in the county of
Forfar, and he was moreover, by birth, a child of that "bonnie" place.
His father, a minister of Saint Catherine's Church, had given him a
thorough education, knowing that it would be sure to help all, even a
sea-captain.

At this juncture of affairs the old cousin of Harry Grant died, and
the two children were left alone in the world. Mary Grant was then
fourteen. Her courageous soul did not flinch at the situation that was
presented, but she devoted herself entirely to her brother, who was
still a child. She must bring him up and instruct him. By dint of
economy, prudence, and sagacity, laboring night and day, sacrificing
all for him, denying herself everything, the sister succeeded in
educating her brother and bravely fulfilled her sisterly duties.

The two children lived thus at Dundee, and valiantly overcame
their sorrowful and lonely circumstances. Mary thought only of her
brother, and dreamed of a happy future for him. As for herself, alas!
the Britannia was lost forever, and her father dead! We must not,
therefore, attempt to depict her emotion when the advertisement in the
_Times_ accidentally met her eye, and suddenly raised her from her
despair.

It was no time to hesitate. Her resolution was immediately taken. Even
if she should learn that her father's dead body had been found on a
desert coast, or in the hull of a shipwrecked vessel, it was better
than this continual doubt, this eternal torment of uncertainty. She
told her brother all; and the same day the two children took the Perth
Railroad, and at evening arrived at Malcolm Castle, where Mary, after
so many harassing thoughts, began to hope.

[Illustration: "My father, my poor father!" cried Mary Grant, throwing
herself at the feet of Lord Glenarvan.]

Night had now fully set in; and Lady Helena, remembering the fatigue of
the two children, would not longer continue the conversation. Mary
and Robert were conducted to their chambers, and fell asleep dreaming
of a brighter future.

"That Mary Grant is a brave girl," said MacNabb, when he had heard his
cousin's story.

The next morning Mary and her brother rose at daybreak, and were
walking in the galleries and water terraces of the castle, when the
sound of a coach was heard in the great court-yard. It was Lord
Glenarvan returning to Malcolm Castle at the full speed of his horses.
Almost immediately Lady Helena, accompanied by the major, appeared
in the court-yard, and flew to meet her husband. But he seemed sad,
disappointed, and angry. He clasped his wife in his arms, and was
silent.

"My father, my poor father!" cried Mary Grant, throwing herself at the
feet of Lord Glenarvan.

Lord Glenarvan shook his head; not that he doubted the clemency of Her
Gracious Majesty, but he doubted whether Mary Grant would gain access
to her; for but few suppliants reach the steps of a throne.

"Mary Grant," she exclaimed, "wait, my child; listen to what I am about
to say."

At these courageous words Lord Glenarvan had extended his arms to his
wife. He smiled. He pressed her to his heart, while Mary and Robert
kissed her hands.

Captain Mangles, while occupied in lading and provisioning his craft,
did not forget to prepare Lord and Lady Glenarvan's apartments for a
long voyage. He likewise provided cabins for Captain Grant's children,
for Lady Helena could not refuse Mary permission to accompany her on
the expedition.

On the 24th of August, Lord and Lady Glenarvan, Major MacNabb, Mary and
Robert Grant, Mr. Olbinett, the steward of the yacht, and his wife, who
was in the service of Lady Glenarvan, left the castle, after taking an
affectionate farewell of their family servants. Several hours afterward
they found themselves on board. Many of the population of Glasgow
welcomed with sympathetic admiration the young and courageous lady who
renounced the pleasures of a life of luxury, and sailed to the rescue
of the shipwrecked sailors.

The apartments of Lord Glenarvan and his wife occupied the entire stern
of the vessel. They consisted of two bed-chambers, a parlor, and two
dressing-rooms, adjoining which was an open square inclosed by six
cabins, five of which were occupied by Mary and Robert Grant, Mr. and
Mrs. Olbinett, and Major MacNabb. As for the cabins of the captain and
the mate, they were situated in the forecastle, and opened on the deck.
The crew were lodged between-decks very comfortably, for the yacht of
course carried nothing but her coal, provisions, and armament.

A numerous throng accompanied them. There in the spacious aisle,
filled with tombs of the great and good, the Rev. Mr. Morton implored
the blessing of Heaven, and commended the expedition to the care of
Providence. For a moment the voice of Mary Grant arose in the old
church. The young girl was praying for her benefactors, and shedding
before God the sweet tears of gratitude. The assembly retired under the
influence of a deep emotion.

Lady Helena and Mary Grant were able before daybreak to join Lord
Glenarvan, the major, and the captain, on deck. The sunrise was
magnificent. The orb of day, like a gilded metal disk, rose from the
ocean, as from an immense and silvery basin. The ship glided in the
midst of a splendid iridescence, and you would truly have thought that
her sails expanded under the influence of the sun's rays, whilst even
the crew of the yacht silently admired this reappearance of the orb of
day.

"You hear, Mary," said Lady Helena: "in five weeks!"

"And how do you bear this voyage, Miss Mary?" inquired Lord Glenarvan.

At a gesture of the captain, all eyes were turned towards the mainmast,
and every one could perceive Robert, suspended by the stays of the
foretop-gallant sail, a hundred feet aloft. Mary could not restrain a
motion of fear.

"Not so; but I have the best of crews, on the best of ships. Do you not
wonder at our Duncan, Miss Mary?"

"Oh!" said Lord Glenarvan, "the major is absorbed in the smoke of his
cigar; we must not disturb him, for I assure you he is an inveterate
smoker, Miss Mary; he smokes all the time, even in his sleep."

In spite of this mortifying reflection, Paganel made the best use of a
delay that he could not avoid. He showed himself amiable, and even gay;
he enchanted the ladies with his good humor, and before the end of the
day he was the friend of every one. At his request the famous document
was shown to him. He studied it carefully, long and minutely. No other
interpretation appeared to him possible. Mary Grant and her brother
inspired him with the liveliest interest. He gave them good hopes. His
way of distinguishing the events, and the undeniable success that he
predicted for the Duncan, elicited a smile from the young girl.

The joy on board was general, when Paganel's resolution was known.
Young Robert threw himself on his neck with very demonstrative
delight. The worthy geographer almost fell backwards. "A rough little
gentleman," said he; "I will teach him geography." As Captain Mangles
had engaged to make him a sailor, Glenarvan a man of honor, the major a
boy of coolness, Lady Helena a noble and generous being, and Mary Grant
a pupil grateful towards such patrons, Robert was evidently to become
one day an accomplished gentleman.

The Duncan soon finished shipping her coal, and then leaving these
gloomy regions she gained the current from the southeast coast of
Brazil, and, after crossing the equator with a fine breeze from the
north, she entered the southern hemisphere. The passage was effected
without difficulty, and every one had good hopes. On this voyage in
search of Captain Grant, the probabilities increased every day. Their
captain was one of the most confident on board; but his confidence
proceeded especially from the desire that he cherished so strongly at
heart, of seeing Miss Mary happy and consoled. He was particularly
interested in this young girl; and this feeling he concealed so well,
that, except Miss Grant and himself, no one on board the Duncan had
perceived it.

Glenarvan then informed his companions of the failure of his endeavors.
Mary Grant and her brother could not restrain their grief. It was now
six days since the arrival of the Duncan at Talcahuana. The passengers
were together in the cabin. Lady Helena was consoling, not by her
words--for what could she say?--but by her caresses, the two children
of the captain. Jacques Paganel had taken up the document again, and
was regarding it with earnest attention, as if he would have drawn from
it new secrets. For an hour he had examined it thus, when Glenarvan,
addressing him, said,--

"Nothing is easier, my dear Mary. Instead of reading _they will be
prisoners_, read _they are prisoners_, and all will be clear."

"Sir, sir," exclaimed Mary Grant, in a voice broken with emotion, "how
can I thank a devotion that exposes you to so many dangers?"

"Yes, my lord; he was so kind to sister and me. He thought only of us,
and every voyage brought us a memento of the countries he visited, and,
what was better, tender caresses and kind words, on his return. Ah!
you will love him too, when you know him! Mary resembles him. He has a
sweet voice like her. It is singular for a sailor, is it not?"

They then conversed, but not about their present condition, which they
must patiently endure. They returned to the inexhaustible subject of
Captain Grant's recovery. If the waters subsided, in three days the
travelers would be again on board the Duncan. But the captain and his
two sailors, those unfortunate castaways, would not be with them; and
it even seemed after this failure, after this vain search in South
America, as if all hope of finding them were irrevocably lost. Whither
direct a new search? What, too, would be the grief of Lady Helena and
Mary Grant on learning that the future had no hope in store for them!

Thus ended this conversation, that in the future led to such great
results. It completely changed the moral condition of the travelers.
They had caught again the thread of the labyrinth in which they had
thought themselves forever lost. A new hope arose on the ruins of
their fallen projects. They could fearlessly leave behind them this
American continent, and already all their thoughts flew away to the
Australian land. On reaching the Duncan, they would not bring despair
on board, and Lady Helena and Mary Grant would not have to lament the
irrevocable loss of the captain. Thus they forgot the dangers of their
situation in their new-found joy, and their only regret was that they
could not start at once.

These reflections, however, did not pacify Glenarvan. When heart and
reason are at variance, the latter is the weaker power. The lord of
Malcolm Castle seemed to see in the darkness all those whom he loved,
his dear Helena, Mary Grant, and the crew of the Duncan. He wandered
along the barren coast which the waves covered with phosphorescent
bubbles. He looked, he listened, and even thought that he saw a fitful
light on the sea.

It needed only such an assurance to restore hope to the passengers of
the Duncan. Lady Helena and Mary Grant, while the boat was approaching
the ship, had experienced all the anguish of suspense. From the deck
they endeavored to count those who were returning. At one time the
young girl would despair; at another she would think she saw her
father. Her heart beat quickly; she could not speak; she could scarcely
stand. Lady Helena supported her, while Captain Mangles stood beside
her in silence. His keen eyes, accustomed to distinguish distant
objects, could not discern the captain.

But as the boat gradually drew near, the illusion vanished. Not only
Lady Helena and the captain, but Mary Grant, had now lost all hope. It
was, therefore, time for Glenarvan to utter his assuring words.

[Illustration: Lady Helena and Mary Grant, while the boat was
approaching the ship, had experienced all the anguish of suspense. From
the deck they endeavored to count those who were returning.]

He stretched out his arms towards Mary's brother, and pressed his lips
to the boy's cheeks, which were still wet with tears.

They then spoke of the generous Thalcave. Lady Helena regretted that
she could not have shaken hands with the brave Indian. MacNabb, after
the first outbursts of enthusiasm, repaired to his cabin to shave
himself. As for Paganel, he flitted hither and thither, like a bee,
extracting the honey of compliments and smiles. He wished to embrace
all on board the Duncan, and, beginning with Lady Helena and Mary
Grant, ended with Mr. Olbinett, the steward, who could not better
recognize such politeness than by announcing breakfast.

Paganel was applauded, but did not lose a single mouthful. He did not,
however, notice one peculiarity observed by Glenarvan, and that was the
young captain's attentions to his neighbor, Mary Grant. A slight sign
from Lady Helena to her husband told him how matters stood. He gazed at
the two young people with affectionate sympathy, and finally addressed
the captain, but upon a different subject.

Captain Mangles now told the story of his voyage, and was congratulated
by Glenarvan, who, addressing Mary Grant, said,--

"Oh, how could I be?" replied Mary, gazing at Lady Helena, and perhaps
also at the young captain.

"Immediately, my lord," replied the captain, as he went on deck, while
Robert and Mary Grant uttered the liveliest expressions of gratitude;
and the Duncan, leaving the American coast and heading to the east, was
soon swiftly ploughing the waves of the Atlantic.

The Duncan now had before her a broad stretch of ocean but little
traversed by navigators. Between the shores of South America and the
little speck in the ocean known by the name of Tristan d'Acunha, there
was no probability of her meeting with any strange sail; and under some
circumstances, or in some company, the days might have been monotonous
and the hours might have hung wearily. But so ardent was the desire
for success, and so accomplished, yet varied, were the characters of
those who composed the little assembly, that the voyage on the South
Atlantic, though devoid of striking incident, was by no means wanting
in interest. Much of the time was spent on deck, where the ladies'
cabins were now located, Mary Grant especially training her hand, head,
and heart in feeling, thought, and action. The geographer set to work
on a composition entitled "Travels of a Geographer on the Argentine
Pampas;" but many a blank page did he leave. Tho Scottish peer (when
tired of examining for the thousandth time all that belonged to his
yacht) could look at the books and documents which he had brought with
him, intending to peruse them carefully. And as to the major he was
never in company and never out of company; his cigar insured, nothing
else was wanted.

"No, madam," replied he; "but neither you nor Miss Mary can remain on
deck."

He called the passengers on deck, for he did not wish, when the hour
of shipwreck had come, that they should be confined in the cabin.
Glenarvan and his companions gazed at the awful sea. Mary Grant grew
pale.

And Captain Mangles felt himself fully rewarded by these simple words.
Glenarvan kept to himself the secret of his anguish, and neither Lady
Helena, Mary Grant, nor Robert suspected the magnitude of the perils
they had just escaped.

"Yes, Miss Mary," said the captain; "when men have exhausted human
resources, then Heaven interposes, and, by some unforeseen event, opens
to them new ways."

"God grant it, captain!" replied Mary.

The invitation so hospitably given was accepted without ceremony. Lady
Helena and Mary Grant, conducted by Mrs. O'Moore, entered the house,
while the colonist's sons relieved the visitors of their fire-arms.

These words produced a gloomy impression upon his hearers. Robert and
Mary listened to them with tearful eyes. Paganel could not find a word
of consolation or hope. Captain Mangles suffered a grief that he could
not subdue. Despair was seizing upon the souls of the noble people whom
the Duncan had vainly brought to these distant shores, when all at once
a voice was heard:--

Mary Grant, half fainting with emotion, and overcome with happiness,
sank into the arms of Lady Helena; while Captain Mangles, Robert, and
Paganel went towards the man whom their host had called Ayrton.

No one noticed these flattering words of Paganel. Glenarvan, Lady
Helena, Mary, and Robert had crowded around Ayrton, and eagerly clasped
his hands. It seemed as if the presence of this man was a guarantee of
the safety of Harry Grant. Since the sailor had escaped the dangers
of shipwreck, why should not the captain be safe and sound? Ayrton
repeated his declaration that if Captain Grant were living he must be
in Australia. He answered with remarkable intelligence and clearness
the many questions that were propounded to him. Miss Mary, while
he spoke, held one of his hands in her own. This sailor had been a
companion of her father, one of the shipwrecked survivors of the
Britannia. He had lived with Harry Grant, had sailed the seas with him,
had braved the same dangers! She could not withdraw her eyes from that
weather-beaten face, and she wept with happiness.

As for Captain Mangles, his doubts did not stand long before the
assertions of the sailor, and he considered him a real companion of
Captain Grant when he heard him speak to the young girl of her father.
Ayrton knew Mary and Robert perfectly. He had seen them at Glasgow
on the departure of the Britannia. He remembered that they had been
present at the farewell dinner given on board to the friends of the
captain. Sheriff MacIntyre was one of the guests. Robert--scarcely
ten years old--had been confided to the care of Dick Turner, the
boatswain, but had escaped from him and climbed to the top-sail
yard-arm.

The quartermaster remembered, too, a thousand little circumstances
to which he did not seem to attach so much importance as did Captain
Mangles. When he stopped, Mary said, in her sweet voice,--

Ayrton acceded to the young girl's request. Glenarvan was reluctant to
interrupt him, and yet many more important questions thronged his mind.
But Lady Helena, pointing out to him Mary's joyful excitement, checked
his inquiries.

Glenarvan was about to answer that he had never doubted Ayrton's
honesty, when the latter returned and presented his contract. It was a
paper signed by the owners of the Britannia and Captain Grant, whose
writing Mary recognized immediately. It stated that "Tom Ayrton, able
seaman, was engaged as quartermaster on board the brig Britannia of
Glasgow." There was, therefore, no possible doubt of Ayrton's identity,
for it would have been difficult to suppose that this contract could be
in his hands and not belong to him.

"Very well, captain," replied Glenarvan; "you shall accompany us; for,"
added he, smiling, "you certainly ought to be present when we find Mary
Grant's father."

The cart, being without springs, was not very easy; but our travelers
were obliged to conform to circumstances as much as they could. As no
change was possible in its rude construction, Captain Mangles arranged
the interior in the most comfortable manner. He divided it into two
compartments by a wooden partition. The rear one was designed for
the provisions, the baggage, and Mr. Olbinett's portable kitchen,
while the forward one was reserved exclusively for the ladies. The
carpenter converted it into a convenient chamber, covered it with a
thick carpet, and furnished it with a dressing-table and two berths for
Lady Helena and Mary Grant. Thick leathern curtains secured privacy,
when necessary, and were a protection against the chilliness of the
night. In rainy weather the men could find shelter under the awning;
but a tent was to serve this purpose at the time of encampment. Captain
Mangles succeeded in crowding into this narrow space all that two
ladies could need, and Lady Helena and Mary Grant did not greatly miss
the comfortable cabins of the Duncan.

Lady Helena and Mary Grant now made their last preparations, which were
short and less minute than those of Jacques Paganel. The geographer
passed half the night in unscrewing, cleaning, and screwing on again
the lenses of his telescope. He was still asleep the next morning, when
the major awoke him early with a loud summons.

Sam Machell briefly told his story, while the drove continued its
course through the clumps of mimosas. Lady Helena, Mary Grant, and
the horsemen dismounted, and, seated in the shade of a huge gum-tree,
listened to the stock-keeper's narrative.

Lady Helena invited the horsemen to call upon her in turn, for her
parlor was very small. Each was thus relieved from the fatigue of
horseback riding, and enjoyed the society of this amiable lady,
who, assisted by Miss Mary, performed with perfect grace the honors
of her movable mansion. Captain Mangles was not forgotten in these
invitations, and his rather sober conversation was not at all
displeasing.

"What does the word mean?" asked Mary Grant.

"My dear Edward," replied Lady Helena, "Mary and I accept; but on the
condition that it shall cause no trouble or delay."

The major, on the contrary, without even leaving the hotel, had
ascertained the fears that were agitating the little community. Ten
minutes' conversation with the loquacious landlord had informed him;
but he did not utter a word. Not until supper was over, and Lady
Helena, Mary, and Robert had retired to their chambers, did the major
say to his companions:

At this juncture Robert narrowly escaped being the victim of his
rashness. In order to make sure of his aim, he approached so near the
kangaroo that the animal made a spring at him. Robert fell. A cry of
alarm resounded. Mary Grant, speechless with apprehension, stretched
her hands towards her brother. No one dared to fire, for fear of
hitting the boy.

"Thanks, Captain Mangles! thanks!" said Mary, extending her hand to the
young captain.

"Yes, yes, that is so," eagerly replied Paganel, who would fain have
retracted his words. "What could I have been thinking of? Convicts? Who
ever heard of convicts in Australia? Moreover, as soon as they land,
they make very honest people. The climate, you know, Miss Mary, the
moral effect of the climate----"

In his desire to correct his blunder, the poor geographer became
hopelessly involved. Lady Helena looked at him, wondering what had
deprived him of his usual coolness; but, not wishing to embarrass him
further, she retired with Mary to the tent, where Mr. Olbinett was
engaged in preparing breakfast.

The answer was unanimous,--make for the coast without delay. Lady
Helena and Mary Grant engaged to travel fifteen miles a day. The
courageous women did not shrink from traversing the entire distance on
foot, if necessary.

"To the cart! to the cart!" cried Captain Mangles, as he hurried on
Lady Helena and Mary Grant, who were soon in safety behind its stout
sides.

Lady Helena and Mary Grant's first care had been to dress Glenarvan's
wound. At the very moment that her husband fell, from Ben Joyce's
bullet, in her terror she had rushed towards him. Then, controlling
her emotion, this courageous woman had assisted Glenarvan to the cart.
Here the shoulder of the wounded man was laid bare, and the major
perceived that the ball had lacerated the flesh, causing no other
injury. Neither bones nor large muscles seemed affected. The wound bled
considerably, but Glenarvan, by moving the fingers of his hand and
fore-arm, encouraged his friends to expect a favorable result. When his
wound was dressed, he no longer desired any attention, and explanations
followed. The travelers, except Wilson and Mulready, who were keeping
guard outside, had taken seats as well as possible in the cart, and the
major was requested to speak.

But one serious fact appeared from this explanation. No one had yet
thought of it; only Mary Grant, disregarding the past, looked forward
to the future. Captain Mangles first saw her pale and disconsolate. He
understood what was passing in her mind.

"Miss Mary!" cried he, "you are weeping!"

She could not continue. But a sudden revelation dawned on the mind of
each. They comprehended Mary's grief, why the tears flowed from her
eyes, why the name of her father rose to her lips.

He had risen; he had seized the paper. He shook it, seeking to
repress words ready to escape his lips. Lady Helena, Mary, Robert,
and Glenarvan gazed at him without understanding this inexplicable
agitation. Paganel was like a man whom a sudden frenzy has seized. But
this state of nervous excitation did not last. He gradually grew calm.
The joy that gleamed in his eyes died away, and, resuming his place, he
said, in a quiet tone:

Glenarvan, Lady Helena, Mary Grant, all clasped Mulready's hand. This
departure on a dark and stormy night, over a road beset with dangers,
across the unknown stretches of a desert, would have appalled a heart
less courageous than that of the sailor.

The travelers, after Mulready's departure, ensconced themselves in the
cart. Lady Helena, Mary Grant, Glenarvan, and Paganel occupied the
front compartment, which had been made water-tight. In the rear part
Olbinett, Wilson, and Robert had found a sufficient shelter, while the
major and Captain Mangles were on guard without. This precaution was
necessary, for an attack by the convicts was easy and possible.

"Edward," said he, "be calm; listen to a friend; think of Lady Helena,
Mary Grant, all who remain! Besides, where will you go? Where find
Mulready? He was attacked two miles distant at least. On what road?
What path take?"

The night passed in anxiety and anguish. They feared every moment that
the wounded man would die. A burning fever consumed him. Lady Helena
and Mary Grant, as though his sisters, did not leave him; never was
patient better nursed, or by more tender hands.

Each took his place on the raft, which was moored to the bank. Captain
Mangles had arranged on the starboard side, and confided to Wilson, a
kind of oar to sustain the raft against the current, and prevent its
drifting. As for himself, he stood at the stern, and steered by means
of a clumsy rudder. Lady Helena and Mary Grant occupied the centre
of the raft near Mulready. Glenarvan, the major, Paganel, and Robert
surrounded them, ready to lend assistance.

Mary Grant, in this situation, no longer had the courage to utter the
name of her father. She suppressed her own anguish by thinking of the
unfortunate crew. Controlling herself in the presence of her friend, it
was she who consoled Lady Helena, from whom she had received so many
consolations. The young girl was the first to speak of their return to
Scotland. At seeing her so courageous and resigned, Captain Mangles
admired her, and would have spoken a final word in favor of Captain
Grant, if Mary had not stopped him with a look and then said:

"You are right, Miss Mary," replied he; "he must. The English
authorities must also be informed of the fate of the Duncan. But do not
give up all hope. The search that we have begun I would continue alone,
rather than abandon. I will find Captain Grant, or succumb to the task!"

This was a solemn compact which John Mangles thus made. Mary accepted
it, and gave her hand to the young captain, as if to ratify this
treaty. On the part of the latter it was a devotion of his entire life;
on the part of the former, an unchanging gratitude.

Lady Helena and Mary Grant were very much pleased to know that they
were to start the next day. Glenarvan observed, however, that the
Macquarie could not equal the Duncan for comfort; but, after so many
hardships, they were not likely to be overcome by trifles. Mr. Olbinett
was requested to take charge of the provisions. The poor man, since the
loss of the Duncan, had often lamented the unhappy fate of his wife,
who had remained on board, and would be, consequently, the victim of
the convicts' brutality. However, he fulfilled his duties as steward
with his accustomed zeal, and their food might yet consist of dishes
that were never seen on the ship's table.

But neither Lady Helena nor Mary Grant complained, although the
continual rain kept them confined, and the want of air and rolling of
the ship seriously incommoded them. Their friends sought to divert
them, and Paganel strove to while the time with his stories, but did
not succeed so well as previously.

"Yes, my lord. We should try in vain. We should be captured, at the
mercy of the wretches. Ben Joyce has shown that he does not hesitate at
a crime. I should sell my life dearly. We would defend ourselves to the
last extremity. Well! But, then, think of Lady Helena and Mary Grant!"

In the evening, after supper, while Lady Helena and Mary Grant were
reposing in their berths, Paganel and his friends conversed seriously
as they paced the deck. The geographer had asked Captain Mangles
whether the raft could not follow the coast as far as Auckland, instead
of landing the passengers at once. The captain replied that it would be
impossible with such a rude craft.

Lady Helena and Mary Grant descended the ship's side by a clumsy
rope-ladder, and took their seats at the foot of the mast near the
cases of provisions, their companions around them. Wilson took the
helm, the captain stationed himself at the sail-tackling, and Mulready
cut the cable that confined the raft to the brig. The sail was spread,
and they began to move towards the shore under the combined influence
of wind and tide.

"May Heaven have pity on them!" murmured Mary Grant.

"So much the better; for these are severe hardships for Lady Helena and
Mary Grant."

The geographer's opinion prevailed. Lady Helena preferred to pass
the last night in the open air rather than to expose her companions.
Neither she nor Mary Grant required a halt, and they therefore
continued to follow the banks of the river.

Meantime the canoe rapidly ascended the river. Paganel, whose
changeable disposition carried him from one extreme to another, had
regained his hopefulness. He believed that the Maoris were sparing them
the fatigue of their journey to the English settlements, and that they
were certain to arrive at their destination. He was, therefore, quite
resigned to his lot, and traced on his map the course of the Waikato
across the plains and valleys of the province. Lady Helena and Mary
Grant, suppressing their terror, conversed in low tones with Glenarvan,
and the most skillful physiognomist could not have detected on their
faces the anxiety of their hearts.

Glenarvan cast a sorrowful glance at his young wife and Mary Grant,
exposed to the mercy of these fierce natives, and captives in a wild
country, far from all human assistance. But he saw that he was watched
by Kai-Koumou, and, not wishing to show that one of the captives was
his wife, he prudently kept his thoughts to himself, and gazed at the
banks of the river with apparent indifference.

On their arrival, the captives were terribly impressed at sight of
the heads that ornamented the stakes of the second inclosure. Lady
Helena and Mary Grant turned away their eyes with more of disgust than
terror. These heads had most of them belonged to hostile chiefs, fallen
in battle, whose bodies had served as food for the conquerors. The
geographer knew them to be such by their hollow and eyeless sockets!

In the midst of these cries and threats, Lady Helena affected a
calmness that she could not feel in her heart. This courageous woman,
in order that her husband's coolness might not forsake him, heroically
controlled her emotions. Poor Mary Grant felt herself growing weak, and
Captain Mangles supported her, ready to die in her defence. The others
endured this torrent of invectives in various ways, either indifferent
like the major, or increasingly annoyed like Paganel.

"Edward," said she, in a firm voice, "neither Mary Grant nor I shall
fall alive into the hands of those savages!"

"Offer these ladies first in exchange for your priest," answered
Glenarvan, pointing to Lady Helena and Mary Grant. Lady Helena would
have rushed towards her husband, but the major restrained her.

What a night he and his companions passed! Who could depict their
anguish, or measure their sufferings? Neither poor Robert nor brave
Paganel had reappeared. But how could they doubt their fate? Were they
not the first victims of the natives' vengeance? All hope had vanished
even from the heart of the major, who did not easily despair. John
Mangles felt himself growing mad at sight of the sad dejection of Mary
Grant, thus separated from her brother. Glenarvan thought of that
terrible request of Lady Helena, who, rather than yield to torture or
slavery, preferred to die by his hand. Could he summon this fearful
courage? As for an escape, that was plainly impossible. Ten warriors,
armed to the teeth, guarded the entrance of the temple.

Glenarvan clasped his wife to his heart. At this moment Mary Grant
approached John Mangles.

"Mary!" cried the young captain, in terror. "Ah! dear Mary----"

The unfortunates were therefore to suffer a common death. Lady Helena
and Mary Grant raised towards heaven a look of thankfulness.

The meal being finished, Lady Helena repeated the evening prayer aloud,
while all her companions, with uncovered heads, joined her. Having
fulfilled this duty, and enjoyed this privilege, the prisoners embraced
each other. Lady Helena and Mary Grant then retired to one corner of
the hut, and stretched themselves upon a mat. Sleep, which soothes all
woes, soon closed their eyes, and they slumbered in each other's arms,
overcome by fatigue and long wakefulness.

"John, you have promised Mary Grant what I have promised Lady Helena.
What have you resolved?"

But, though only whispering this name, Mary Grant, awakened by the
movement that was taking place in the hut, glided towards Glenarvan,
and, seizing this hand all soiled with mud, covered it with kisses.

"He is not, Robert," replied Mary Grant.

The captain made a sign to Glenarvan to continue his descent. The
latter, accordingly, slid gently down the slope, and soon Lady Helena
and he stood on the narrow path where Robert was waiting for them. The
rope was shaken three times, and next Captain Mangles, followed by Mary
Grant, took the same perilous course. They were successful, and joined
Lord and Lady Glenarvan.

Before this dreaded moment arrived it was important that the fugitives
should be beyond the reach of the savages. But they could not advance
quickly, for the paths were steep. Lady Helena scaled the declivities,
supported and even carried by Glenarvan, while Mary Grant leaned upon
the arm of her betrothed. Robert, happy and triumphant, whose heart was
full of joy at his success, took the lead, followed by the two sailors.

So saying, he gave her the text of the Bible which had been sent to
them. She and Mary Grant, whose confiding soul was always open to
the ministrations of Heaven, saw, in the words of the Holy Book, an
infallible pledge of safety.

Lady Helena, Mary Grant, and their companions, quite reassured at
seeing that the superstition of the Maoris was still stronger than
their rage, entered the tomb. It was a palisade of red painted stakes.
Symbolical faces, a real tattooing on wood, described the nobleness
and exploits of the deceased. Strings of pipes, shells, and carved
stones extended from one stake to another. Inside, the earth was hidden
beneath a carpet of green leaves. In the centre a slight protuberance
marked the freshly-made grave. Here reposed the weapons of the chief,
his guns loaded and primed, his lance, his splendid hatchet of green
jade, with a supply of powder and balls sufficient for the hunts of the
other world.

"No, my dear Mary," replied Paganel, "they will not do that. The
mountain is tabooed, and if it shall itself devour its profaners the
taboo will be still more rigorous."

The provisions were taken from the sacks, and all did ample justice to
them. Mary Grant and the major, who had not hitherto been very well
satisfied with the edible ferns, made this time a hearty meal of them.
They rested here till two o'clock in the afternoon, then the journey
towards the east was resumed, and at evening the travelers encamped
eight miles from the mountains. They needed no urging to sleep in the
open air.

When he did speak of Captain Grant, he began to lay plans for a further
search. He declared to Mary that Lord Glenarvan would resume this
undertaking, hitherto so unsuccessful.

But at that moment his eyes fell upon Robert and Mary Grant, and he
stopped short, finally replying:

However, leaving Lady Helena, Mary Grant, the major, Paganel, and
Robert to enter the saloon, Glenarvan and Captain Mangles retained Tom
Austin with them. They wished to question him further.

Lady Helena yielded to this request, and Mary Grant and she took their
places beside him, while around them stood the major, Paganel, Captain
Mangles, Robert, Wilson, Mulready, and Olbinett, all who had suffered
so severely by the convict's treason. The crew of the yacht, who did
not yet understand the seriousness of these proceedings, maintained a
profound silence.

Lady Helena, seeing her husband's failures, now suggested an attempt,
in her turn, to persuade the quartermaster. Where a man had failed,
perhaps a woman could succeed by her gentle entreaty. Glenarvan,
knowing the tact of his young wife, gave his hearty approval. Ayrton
was, accordingly, brought to Lady Helena's boudoir. Mary Grant was to
be present at the interview, for the young girl's influence might also
be great, and Lady Helena would not neglect any chance of success.

Lady Helena retired to her cabin, accompanied by Mary Grant, and the
quartermaster was taken to the saloon where Glenarvan awaited him.

In the stillness Mary and Robert Grant came on deck. The two children,
leaning upon the railing, gazed sadly at the phosphorescent sea and the
luminous wake of the yacht. Mary thought of Robert's future; Robert
thought of his sister's; both thought of their father. Was that beloved
parent still living? Yet must they give him up? But no, what would life
be without him? What would become of them without his protection? What
would have become of them already, except for the magnanimity of Lord
and Lady Glenarvan?

"Mary," said he, "we must never despair. Remember the lessons our
father taught us. 'Courage compensates for everything in this world,'
he said. Let us have that indomitable courage that overcomes all
obstacles. Hitherto you have labored for me, my sister, but now I shall
labor for you."

"I must tell you one thing," continued he. "You will not be sorry,
Mary?"

"Yes, sister, I shall be a sailor, like my father, and like Captain
John. Mary, my dear Mary, he has not lost all hope! You will have, like
me, confidence in his devotion. He has promised that he will make me a
thorough and efficient sailor, and we shall seek our father together.
Say that you are willing, sister. What our father would have done for
us it is our duty, or mine at least, to do for him. My life has but one
object, to which it is wholly devoted,--to search always for him who
would never have abandoned either of us. Dear Mary, how good our father
was!"

"And so noble, so generous!" added Mary. "Do you know, Robert, that he
was already one of the glories of our country, and would have ranked
among its great men if fate had not arrested his course?"

Mary pressed her brother to her heart, and the child felt tears
dropping upon his forehead.

"Mary! Mary!" cried he, "it is in vain for them to speak, or to keep
silent. I hope still, and shall always do so. A man like our father
does not die till he has accomplished his purpose!"

Mary Grant could not reply; sobs choked her utterance. A thousand
emotions agitated her soul at the thought that new attempts would be
made to find her father, and that the young captain's devotion was
boundless.

"Yes," said Mary. "But must we be separated?"

"You will not be alone, Mary, I know. John has told me so. Lady Helena
will not permit you to leave her. You are a woman, and can and ought to
accept her benefits. To refuse them would be ungrateful. But a man, as
my father has told me a hundred times, ought to make his own fortune."

"My brother, my child!" exclaimed Mary, "how happy our father would be
if he could hear you! How much you resemble him, dear Robert! When you
are a man you will be quite like him!"

"God grant it, Mary!" said Robert, glowing with holy and filial pride.

"But how shall we pay our debt to Lord and Lady Glenarvan?" continued
Mary.

"Mary," said Robert, "did you hear?"

"Robert," said Mary, pale with emotion, "I thought--yes, I thought like
you."

This was too much for Mary Grant. Overcome by emotion, she sank
senseless into her brother's arms.

"Yes," repeated he, "my father is yonder! I heard his voice, and Mary
did too!"

Just then Mary Grant recovered consciousness, and, looking wildly
around, cried:

Early the next morning the passengers (and among them were Robert
and Mary, for it was impossible to restrain them) were assembled
on deck. All wished to examine this land, which had been scarcely
distinguishable the night before. The principal points of the island
were eagerly scanned. The yacht coasted along about a mile from the
shore, and the unassisted eye could easily discern the larger objects.

No one knew what to say. Were there three men, shipwrecked sailors,
Englishmen, on that island? All recalled the events of the night
before, and thought of the voice heard by Robert and Mary. Perhaps,
after all, they were not mistaken. A voice might have reached them.
But could this voice be that of their father? No, alas, no! And each,
thinking of the terrible disappointment that was probably in store,
trembled lest this new trial would exceed their strength. But how
restrain them? Lord Glenarvan had not the courage.

At ten yards therefrom, Mary uttered again the heart-rending cry:

A man was standing on the beach between two others. His form was tall
and stout, while his weather-beaten yet pleasant countenance betrayed
a strong resemblance to the features of Mary and Robert Grant. It was,
indeed, the man whom the children had so often described. Their hearts
had not deceived them. It was their father, it was Captain Grant!

He lavished upon these two beings, so dearly loved, the thousand
expressions of love that had been unuttered during long years of
absence. Robert introduced him successively to all his friends. All had
alike proved their kindness and good wishes towards the two orphans.
When Captain Mangles came to be introduced, he blushed like a young
girl, and his voice trembled as he saluted Mary's father.

Lady Helena then told the story of the voyage, and made the captain
proud of his son and daughter. He learned the exploits of the young
hero, and how the boy had already repaid part of his obligation to Lord
Glenarvan at the peril of his life. Captain Mangles' language to Mary
and concerning her was so truly loving, that Harry Grant, who had been
already informed on this point by Lady Helena, placed the hand of his
daughter in that of the noble young captain, and, turning towards Lord
and Lady Glenarvan, said:

But before Ayrton was transferred to Tabor Island, Harry Grant wished
to show his new friends the bounds of his habitation. He invited them
to visit his house, and sit for once at his table. Glenarvan and his
companions cordially accepted the invitation, and Robert and Mary
were not a little desirous to see those haunts where their father had
doubtless at times bewailed his fate. A boat was manned, and the whole
party soon disembarked on the shores of the island.

Harry Grant's story was finished amid a fresh shower of kisses and
caresses from Robert and Mary. The captain learned now, for the first
time, that he owed his deliverance to that hieroglyphic document
that, eight days after his shipwreck, he had inclosed in a bottle and
confided to the mercy of the waves.

The hour for separation had come. The crew and passengers stood on
deck. More than one felt the heart strangely moved. Lady Helena and
Mary Grant could not repress their emotion.

Thus it was that Harry Grant and his two companions were rescued, and
that John Mangles married Mary Grant in the old cathedral of St. Mungo,
where the Rev. Mr. Morton, who nine months before had prayed for the
rescue of the father, now blessed the union of the daughter with one
of his deliverers. It was arranged that Robert should be a sailor,
like his father and brother-in-law, and that he should continue the
contemplated project of the former, under the munificent patronage of
Lord Glenarvan.