I.      The Shark
         II.      The Three Documents
        III.      The Captain's Children
         IV.      Lady Glenarvan's Proposal
          V.      The Departure of the Duncan
         VI.      An Unexpected Passenger
        VII.      Jacques Paganel is Undeceived
       VIII.      The Geographer's Resolution
         IX.      Through the Strait of Magellan
          X.      The Course Decided
         XI.      Traveling in Chili
        XII.      Eleven Thousand Feet Aloft
       XIII.      A Sudden Descent
        XIV.      Providentially Rescued
         XV.      Thalcave
        XVI.      News of the Lost Captain
       XVII.      A Serious Necessity
      XVIII.      In Search of Water
        XIX.      The Red Wolves
         XX.      Strange Signs
        XXI.      A False Trail
       XXII.      The Flood
      XXIII.      A Singular Abode
       XXIV.      Paganel's Disclosure
        XXV.      Between Fire and Water
       XXVI.      The Return on Board
      XXVII.      A New Destination
     XXVIII.      Tristan d'Acunha and the Isle of Amsterdam
       XXIX.      The Storm on the Indian Ocean
        XXX.      A Hospitable Colonist
       XXXI.      The Quartermaster of the Britannia
      XXXII.      Preparations for the Journey
     XXXIII.      An Accident
      XXXIV.      Australian Explorers
       XXXV.      Crime or Calamity?
      XXXVI.      Fresh Faces
     XXXVII.      A Warning
    XXXVIII.      Wealth in the Wilderness
      XXXIX.      Suspicious Occurrences
         XL.      A Startling Discovery
        XLI.      The Plot Unveiled
       XLII.      Four Days of Anguish
      XLIII.      Helpless and Hopeless
       XLIV.      A Rough Captain
        XLV.      The Wreck of the Macquarie
       XLVI.      Vain Efforts
      XLVII.      A Dreaded Country
     XLVIII.      Introduction to the Cannibals
       XLIX.      A Momentous Interview
          L.      The Chief's Funeral
         LI.      Strangely Liberated
        LII.      The Sacred Mountain
       LIII.      A Bold Stratagem
        LIV.      From Peril to Safety
         LV.      Why the Duncan went to New Zealand
        LVI.      Ayrton's Obstinacy
       LVII.      A Discouraging Confession
      LVIII.      A Cry in the Night
        LIX.      Captain Grant's Story
         LX.      Paganel's Last Entanglement

"Jacques Eliacim François Marie Paganel, secretary of the Geographical
Society of Paris; corresponding member of the societies of Berlin,
Bombay, Darmstadt, Leipsic, London, St. Petersburg, Vienna, and New
York; honorary member of the Royal Geographical and Ethnographical
Institute of the East Indies, who, after passing twenty years of his
life in studying geography, designs now to enter upon a roving life,
and is directing his course to India to continue there the labors of
the great travelers."

The secretary of the Geographical Society must have been an agreeable
person, for all this was said with much modesty. Lord Glenarvan,
moreover, knew perfectly whom he had met. The name and merit of Jacques
Paganel were well known to him. His geographical labors, his reports
on modern discoveries, published in the bulletins of the Society, his
correspondence with the entire world, had made him one of the most
distinguished scientific men of France. Thus Glenarvan extended his
hand very cordially to his unexpected guest.

"And now that our introduction is over," added he, "will you permit me,
Monsieur Paganel, to ask you a question?"

"Twenty, my lord," replied Jacques Paganel; "it will always be a
pleasure to converse with you."

Jacques Paganel's hearers now knew the reason of his presence on board.
The Frenchman, mistaking the vessel, had embarked while the crew of
the Duncan were engaged in the ceremony at Saint Mungo. Everything was
explained. But what would the geographer say, when he learned the name
and destination of the vessel on which he had taken passage?

"So, Monsieur Paganel," said Glenarvan, "you have chosen Calcutta as
your centre of action?"

Paganel was grandiloquent. He spoke with a lofty animation, and was
carried away in the rapid flight of imagination. It would have been
as impossible to check him as to stay the Rhine at the Falls of
Schaffhausen.

"Monsieur Jacques Paganel," said Lord Glenarvan, after a moment
of silence, "that is certainly a fine voyage, and one for which
science would be very grateful; but I will not further prolong your
ignorance. For the present, you must give up the pleasure of seeing
India."

Paganel's amazement cannot be depicted. He looked first at Lord
Glenarvan, always serious; then at Lady Helena and Miss Grant, whose
features expressed a sympathetic disappointment; and finally at Captain
Mangles, who was smiling, and the imperturbable major. Then, raising
his shoulders and drawing down his glasses from his forehead to his
eyes, he exclaimed,--

"On the whole, I am not astonished at this on the part of Jacques
Paganel," said Glenarvan; "he is noted for such blunders. He once
published a celebrated map of America, in which he located Japan.
However, he is a distinguished scholar, and one of the best geographers
of France."

At this moment Paganel, woeful and humble, reappeared on deck, after
convincing himself that his baggage was on board. He kept repeating
those fatal words: "The Duncan! the Duncan!" He could find no others
in his vocabulary. He went to and fro, examining the rigging of the
yacht, and questioning the mute horizon of the open sea. At last he
returned to Lord Glenarvan.

"But," said Paganel after examining the vessel again, "the Duncan is a
pleasure yacht."

"A thousand thanks, my lord," replied Paganel; "I am truly sensible
to your courtesy. But permit me to make a simple remark. India is a
beautiful country. It offers marvelous surprises to travelers. These
ladies have probably never visited it. Well, the man at the helm needs
only to give a turn to the wheel, and the Duncan will go as easily to
Calcutta as Concepcion. Now, since this is a pleasure voyage----"

The negative reception that met Paganel's proposal did not permit him
to develop it. He paused.

"Monsieur Paganel," said Lady Helena at length, "if this were only a
pleasure voyage, I would answer: 'Let us all go to India,' and Lord
Glenarvan would not disapprove. But the Duncan is going to recover
some shipwrecked sailors, abandoned on the coast of Patagonia; and she
cannot change so humane a course."

"Well, Monsieur Paganel," said Glenarvan, "it shall be as you desire;
and, for my part, I am happy that I can offer you for a few days the
hospitalities of my vessel. May you not grow weary of our company."

In spite of this mortifying reflection, Paganel made the best use of a
delay that he could not avoid. He showed himself amiable, and even gay;
he enchanted the ladies with his good humor, and before the end of the
day he was the friend of every one. At his request the famous document
was shown to him. He studied it carefully, long and minutely. No other
interpretation appeared to him possible. Mary Grant and her brother
inspired him with the liveliest interest. He gave them good hopes. His
way of distinguishing the events, and the undeniable success that he
predicted for the Duncan, elicited a smile from the young girl.

"My dear lord," replied Paganel, "I will not be formal with you. Before
my arrival on board, did you intend to stop at Madeira?"

"As you please, my dear Paganel," replied Glenarvan, who could not help
smiling, and with good reason.

The same day, at two o'clock in the afternoon, Captain Mangles and
Paganel were walking on the deck. The Frenchman pressed his companion
with lively questions concerning Chili. All at once the captain
interrupted him, and pointing towards the southern horizon, said,--

Whether Paganel wished to see or not, he had to yield to the evidence
some hours afterwards, or, at least, confess himself blind.

"Yes, yes, perfectly!" replied Paganel. "And that," added he in a
contemptuous tone, "is what you call the Peak of Teneriffe?"

"Except my own," said Paganel, laughing. "But, my dear captain, have
not the Cape Verd Islands important landings?"

"Not to speak of an advantage that is not to be despised," answered
Paganel; "that the Cape Verd Islands are not far from Senegal, where I
shall find fellow-countrymen."

"As you please, Mr. Paganel," replied Captain Mangles. "I am certain
that geographical science will gain by your sojourn in these islands.
We must land there to take in coal; you will, therefore, cause us no
delay."

The next day Paganel began to collect his baggage preparatory to
his approaching departure. In a short time they entered the bay of
Villa-Praïa, and anchored opposite the city in eight fathoms of
water. The weather was stormy and the surf high, although the bay was
sheltered from the winds. The rain fell in torrents so that they could
scarcely see the city, which was on an elevated plain in the form of a
terrace, resting on volcanic rocks three hundred feet in height. The
appearance of the island through this rainy curtain was misty.

Shipping the coal was not accomplished without great difficulty, and
the passengers saw themselves confined to the cabin, while sea and
sky mingled their waters in an indescribable tumult. The weather was,
therefore, the topic of conversation on board. Each one had his say
except the major, who would have witnessed the deluge itself with
perfect indifference. Paganel walked to and fro, shaking his head.

"Seven or eight months!" exclaimed Paganel.

"But," replied Paganel in a pitiful tone, "what could I do after the
investigations of the geologist Deville?"

"That is really a pity," said Lady Helena. "What will become of you,
Monsieur Paganel?"

Paganel was silent for a few moments.

"My dear Glenarvan," continued Paganel at last, "where shall you land
next?"

"Eh! my lord," exclaimed Paganel, "that is a reason I should never have
imagined!"

"And then, my dear Paganel, you know that you can gain the gold medal
in any country whatever. There is something to do, to seek, to
discover, everywhere, in the chains of the Cordilleras as well as the
mountains of Thibet."

"Well, Monsieur Paganel, shall you accompany us?" asked Lady Helena in
her most persuasive tone.

"Consider also, Monsieur Paganel," continued Lady Helena, "that in this
enterprise you will have the right to associate the name of France with
that of Scotland."

"And do you, indeed, wish me, my good friends?" replied Paganel. "Well,
you desire me to stay very much?"

"And you, Paganel, you are dying to stay," retorted Glenarvan.

The joy on board was general, when Paganel's resolution was known.
Young Robert threw himself on his neck with very demonstrative
delight. The worthy geographer almost fell backwards. "A rough little
gentleman," said he; "I will teach him geography." As Captain Mangles
had engaged to make him a sailor, Glenarvan a man of honor, the major a
boy of coolness, Lady Helena a noble and generous being, and Mary Grant
a pupil grateful towards such patrons, Robert was evidently to become
one day an accomplished gentleman.

But Paganel had all the passengers on his side except the major,
who was very indifferent to geographical questions, especially at
dinner-time. Having discovered a whole cargo of odd books in the mate's
chests, and among them a number of Cervantes' works, the Frenchman
resolved to learn Spanish, which nobody on board knew, and which would
facilitate his search on the shores of Chili. Thanks to his love for
philology, he did not despair of speaking this new tongue fluently on
arriving at Concepcion. He therefore studied assiduously, and was heard
incessantly muttering heterogeneous syllables. During his leisure hours
he did not fail to give young Robert practical instruction, and taught
him the history of the country they were rapidly approaching.

In the meantime the Duncan was proceeding at a remarkable rate. She
cut the Tropic of Capricorn, and her prow was headed toward the strait
of the celebrated geographer. Now and then the low shores of Patagonia
were seen, but like an almost invisible line on the horizon. They
sailed along the coast for more than ten miles, but Paganel's famous
telescope gave him only a vague idea of these American shores.

The Duncan unerringly and unhesitatingly pursued its capricious
windings, mingling her columns of smoke with the mists on the rocks.
Without lessening her speed, she passed several Spanish factories
established on these deserted shores. At Cape Tamar the strait widened.
The yacht rounded the Narborough Islands, and approached the southern
shores. At last, thirty-six hours after entering the strait, the rocks
of Cape Pilares were discerned at the extreme point of Desolation
Island. An immense open glittering sea extended before her prow, and
Jacques Paganel, hailing it with an enthusiastic gesture, felt moved
like Ferdinand Magellan himself, when the sails of the Trinidad swelled
before the breezes of the Pacific.

Glenarvan at once lowered the boat, and, followed by Paganel, landed
at the foot of the palisade. The learned geographer, profiting by the
circumstance, would have made use of the language which he had studied
so conscientiously; but, to his great astonishment, he could not make
himself understood by the natives.

There they were informed by means of several English words, accompanied
by expressive gestures, that the British consul resided at Concepcion.
It was only an hour's journey. Glenarvan easily found two good horses,
and, a short time after, Paganel and he entered the walls of this great
city, which was built by the enterprising genius of Valdivia, the
valiant companion of Pizarro.

Glenarvan appeared little desirous of seeking the causes of this
decline--though Jacques Paganel attacked him on this subject--and,
without losing an instant, betook himself to the house of J. R.
Bentock, Esq., consul of Her Britannic Majesty. This individual
received him very courteously, and when he learned the story of Captain
Grant undertook to search along the entire coast.

Glenarvan then informed his companions of the failure of his endeavors.
Mary Grant and her brother could not restrain their grief. It was now
six days since the arrival of the Duncan at Talcahuana. The passengers
were together in the cabin. Lady Helena was consoling, not by her
words--for what could she say?--but by her caresses, the two children
of the captain. Jacques Paganel had taken up the document again, and
was regarding it with earnest attention, as if he would have drawn from
it new secrets. For an hour he had examined it thus, when Glenarvan,
addressing him, said,--

"Paganel, I appeal to your sagacity. Is the interpretation we have made
of this document incorrect? Is the sense of these words illogical?"

Paganel did not answer. He was reflecting.

"There you are wrong, my dear lord," said Paganel, at last; "and if
your other conclusions are just, the last at least does not seem to me
rational."

"I mean," answered Paganel, emphasizing his words, "that Captain Grant
is _now prisoner of the Indians_: and I will add that the document
leaves no doubt on this point."

"Impossible? And why, my noble friend?" asked Paganel, smiling.

"Nothing proves it," said Paganel, earnestly; "and I do not see why
the shipwrecked sailors, after being carried by the Indians into the
interior of the country, could not have sought to make known by means
of this bottle the place of their captivity."

"Simply, my dear Paganel, because to throw a bottle into the sea it is
necessary, at least, that the sea should be before you."

"Or, in the absence of the sea," added Paganel, "the rivers which flow
into it."

An astonished silence followed this unexpected, yet reasonable, answer.
By the flash that brightened the eyes of his hearers Paganel knew that
each of them had conceived a new hope. Lady Helena was the first to
resume the conversation.

"However feeble it may be," continued Paganel, "we ought not to neglect
it. If I am right that this bottle reached the sea by following the
current of a river, we cannot fail to come upon the traces of the
prisoners. Look, my friends, look at the map of this country, and I
will convince you beyond a doubt."

So saying, Paganel spread out before them upon the table a large map of
Chili and the Argentine Provinces. "Look," said he, "and follow me in
this passage across the American continent. Let us pass over the narrow
strip of Chili and the Cordilleras of the Andes, and descend into the
midst of the Pampas. Are rivers, streams, water-courses, wanting in
these regions? No. Here are the Rio Negro, the Rio Colorado, and their
affluents, cut by the thirty-seventh parallel, all of which might have
served to transport the document. There, perhaps, in the midst of a
tribe, in the hands of settled Indians, on the shores of these unknown
rivers, in the gorges of the sierras, those whom I have the right to
call our friends are awaiting an interposition of Providence. Ought
we, then, to disappoint their hopes? Do you not think we should follow
across these countries an unswerving course? And if, contrary to all
expectation, I am still mistaken, is it not our duty to trace this
parallel to the very end, and, if necessary, make upon it the tour of
the world?"

These words, spoken with a noble enthusiasm, excited a deep emotion
among Paganel's hearers. All rose to shake hands with him.

"And wherever he is," replied Glenarvan, "we shall find him, my child.
Nothing is more consistent than our friend Paganel's interpretation,
and we must follow without hesitation the course he has indicated.
Either Captain Grant is in the hands of countless Indians, or is
prisoner in a feeble tribe. In the latter case, we will rescue him. In
the former, after ascertaining his situation, we will join the Duncan
on the eastern coast, sail to Buenos Ayres, and with a detachment,
organized by the major, can overcome all the Indians of the Argentine
Plains."

"Without peril, or fatigue," continued Paganel. "How many have already
accomplished it who had scarcely our means for success, and whose
courage was not sustained by the grandeur of the undertaking!"

"Dangers!" cried Paganel. "Who uttered the word _danger_?"

"Danger!" repeated Paganel; "does such a thing exist? Moreover, what is
the question? A journey of scarcely three hundred and fifty leagues,
since we shall proceed in a straight line; a journey which will be
accomplished in a favorable latitude and climate; in short, a journey
whose duration will be only a month at most. It is a mere walk."

"Monsieur Paganel," asked Lady Helena at last, "do you think that, if
the shipwrecked sailors have fallen into the power of the Indians,
their lives have been spared?"

"An easy and agreeable one," replied Paganel. "A few mountains to begin
with; then a gentle descent on the eastern slope of the Andes; and at
last a level, grassy, sandy plain, a real garden."

Thus speaking and developing the programme of the expedition, Paganel
did not even take the trouble to look at the map spread before him.
And he had no need to; educated in the schools of Frézier, Molina,
Humboldt, and Miers, his unerring memory could neither be deceived nor
baffled. After finishing his plan, he added:

"The fewer the better. The only point is to ascertain the situation of
Captain Grant, and not to engage in combat with the Indians. I think
that Lord Glenarvan, as our chief, the major, who would yield his place
to no one, your servant Jacques Paganel----"

"And why not?" answered Paganel. "Travels develop youth. We four, then,
and three sailors of the Duncan----"

"Besides, this is not a journey," added Paganel.

At last, on the 14th of October, at the time agreed upon, every one was
ready. At the moment of departure the passengers of the yacht assembled
in the cabin. The Duncan was on the point of starting, and already her
propeller was agitating the quiet waters of Talcahuana Bay. Glenarvan,
Paganel, MacNabb, Robert Grant, Tom Austin, Wilson and Mulready, armed
with carbines and Colt's revolvers, were preparing to leave the vessel.
Guides and mules were waiting for them on shore.

"And now, dear companions," said Jacques Paganel, "one last clasp of
the hand to last us till we reach the shores of the Atlantic."

"And he will help us, madam," answered Jacques Paganel; "for, I assure
you, we shall help ourselves."

This Englishman had not so forgotten his native tongue, in the company
of mules and Indians, that he could not converse with the travelers.
Hence it was easy for Glenarvan to make known his wishes, and for
the muleteer to execute his orders, of which circumstance the former
availed himself, since Paganel had not yet succeeded in making himself
understood.

Glenarvan, who knew how to travel and conform to the customs of
different countries, had adopted the Chilian costume for himself and
his friends. Paganel and Robert, two children (a large and a small
one), felt no pleasure in introducing their heads into the national
poncho (a large blanket with a hole in the centre), and their legs
into leathern stirrups. They would rather have seen their mules
richly caparisoned, with the Arab bit in their mouths, a long bridle
of braided leather for a whip, and their heads adorned with metal
ornaments and the "alforjas" (double saddle-bags containing the
provisions).

Paganel, always absent-minded, received three or four kicks from his
excellent animal just as he was mounting. Once in the saddle, however,
with his inseparable telescope in a sling and his feet confined in the
stirrups, he confided himself to the sagacity of his beast, and had
no reason to repent. As for young Robert, he showed from the first a
remarkable capacity for becoming an excellent horseman.

They started. The day was magnificent, the sky was perfectly clear,
and the atmosphere sufficiently refreshed by the sea-breezes in spite
of the heat of the sun. The little party followed at a rapid pace the
winding shores of the bay, and made good progress the first day across
the reeds of old dried marshes. Little was said. The parting farewells
had left a deep impression upon the minds of all. They could still see
the smoke of the Duncan as she gradually disappeared on the horizon.
All were silent, except Paganel; this studious geographer kept asking
himself questions, and answering them, in his new language.

While supper was preparing, Glenarvan, Paganel and the catapaz took a
walk among the thatch-roofed houses. Except a church and the remains
of a convent of Franciscans, Arauco presented nothing interesting.
Glenarvan attempted to make some inquiries, but failed, while Paganel
was in despair at not being able to make himself understood by the
inhabitants. But, since they spoke Araucanian, his Spanish served him
as little as Hebrew.

Paganel still continued his study of Spanish.

In studying this language, Paganel did not, however, neglect his
geographical observations. In these, indeed, he was astonishingly
clever, and could not have found his superior. When Glenarvan
questioned the catapaz about some peculiarity of the country, his
learned companion would always anticipate the answer of the guide, who
then gazed at him with a look of amazement.

That same day they met a road which crossed the line that they had
hitherto pursued. Lord Glenarvan naturally asked its name of their
guide, and Paganel as naturally answered,--

"Doubtless the pass of Arica," said Paganel, "which was discovered by
Valdivia Mendoza."

"Yes," replied Paganel; "the pass of Antuco."

"And even precede you," added Paganel. "What is it, after all? To scale
a chain of mountains whose opposite slopes afford an unusually easy
descent. This accomplished, we can find the Argentine laqueanos, who
will guide us across the Pampas, and swift horses accustomed to travel
over the plains. Forward, then, without hesitation."

"Never mind," said Paganel; "on the other side of this wall we shall
find the pass of Antuco again, and I will lead you to the foot of the
mountain as directly as the best guide of the Andes."

Glenarvan never lost sight of young Robert, whose youth and eagerness
led him to acts of rashness, while Paganel pressed on with all the
ardor of a Frenchman. As for the major, he only moved as much as
was necessary, no more, no less, and mounted the path by an almost
insensible motion. Did he perceive that he had been ascending
for several hours? It is not certain. Perhaps he imagined he was
descending.

"Take a rest?" replied Paganel; "how? where? we have no shelter."

"We will carry you, my boy," said Paganel, "but we must, at all
hazards, reach the eastern slope. There, perhaps, we shall find some
hut in which we can take refuge. I ask for two hours more of travel."

"Why," replied Paganel, "it is a palace. It only wants sentries and
courtiers. We shall get along admirably here."

"Well, Tom," said Paganel, "we will try to find something combustible."

"I will accompany you with Wilson," said Paganel.

Glenarvan, Paganel, and Wilson went out of the hut. It was six o'clock
in the evening. The cold was keen and cutting, in spite of the calmness
of the air. The azure of the sky was already fading, and the sun
shedding his last rays on the lofty peaks of the mountains.

Paganel and Glenarvan would have remained a long time to contemplate
this magnificent struggle of the fires of earth with those of heaven,
and the improvised wood-cutters were becoming admirers of nature; but
Wilson, less enthusiastic, reminded them of their situation. Wood was
wanting, it is true, but fortunately a scanty and dry moss clothed the
rocks. An ample supply was taken, as well as of a plant whose roots
were quite combustible. This precious fuel was brought to the hut, and
piled in the fire-place; but it was difficult to kindle the fire, and
especially to keep it burning.

When the viands were prepared, each one drank several mouthfuls of
hot coffee with delight. As for the dried meat, it appeared a little
unsatisfactory, which provoked on the part of Paganel a remark as
useless as it was true.

"What!" cried the major, "are you not content with our supper, Paganel?"

"Impossible! these are real howls!" replied Paganel.

"Ah, I have them!" cried a voice, that of Paganel.

Scarcely had Paganel looked at it when he exclaimed,--

"Well, I will engage to broil it," replied Paganel.

"You are a cook, then, Monsieur Paganel?" said Robert.

In a little while Paganel placed large slices of meat on the coals,
and, in a short time, served up to his companions this appetizing
viand. No one hesitated, but each attacked it ravenously. To the great
amazement of the geographer, a general grimace accompanied by a "pwah!"
followed the first mouthful.

"As to that, my dear Glenarvan," said Paganel, "it is impossible for me
to say. If you believe me, let us search no farther. For my part I am
dying for want of sleep. Let us retire, major!"

Glenarvan and his companions, revived by the aid of the major,
gradually recovered consciousness. Indeed, they had only undergone
a severe giddiness. The mountain was descended, and they would have
applauded a means of locomotion which had been entirely at nature's
expense, if one of the feeblest, Robert Grant, had not been missing.
Every one loved the courageous boy: Paganel was particularly attached
to him; the major, too, in spite of his coldness; but especially
Glenarvan.

"We will wait," said Paganel to the major and Tom Austin. "Let us take
some rest, and recruit our strength. We shall need it, whether to begin
our search or continue our journey."

"Poor Robert!" replied Paganel, wiping his eyes.

The whole night long he wandered on the mountain. Sometimes Paganel,
sometimes the major, followed him, ready to help him on the slippery
summits, or on the edge of the chasms, where his rashness led him. But
his last efforts were fruitless; and to the cry of "Robert! Robert!" a
thousand times repeated, echo alone replied.

What did Glenarvan hope? Was his reason wandering? He had said, "Who
knows?" Paganel was not mistaken. The condor became more distinct every
moment.

"Well," said the major, "this is our friend Paganel's business. It is
fortunate that he thought of learning Spanish."

Paganel was called. He came at once and with all the grace of a
Frenchman saluted the Patagonian, to which the latter paid no
attention. The geographer was informed of the state of affairs, and was
only too glad to use his diligently-acquired knowledge.

And again Paganel began, but with no better success.

"Do--you--understand?" cried Paganel, violently enough to damage his
organs of speech.

It was Paganel's turn now to be astonished, and he hastily put on his
glasses, like one irritated.

Paganel's surprise became amazement. The major and Glenarvan looked at
him quizzingly.

"Major, you are going a little too far," said Paganel in a very dry
tone.

"MacNabb," said Glenarvan, "that is not a probable supposition. However
abstracted our friend Paganel may be, we cannot suppose that his
blunder was to learn one language for another."

"Now, my dear Edward, or rather you, my good Paganel, explain to me
what the difficulty is."

"I will not explain," replied Paganel, "I insist. Here is the book
in which I practice daily the difficulties of the Spanish language!
Examine it, major, and you will see whether I impose upon you."

So saying, Paganel groped in his numerous pockets. After searching a
few moments, he drew forth a volume in a very bad state, and presented
it with an air of assurance. The major took the book, and looked at it.

"The Lusiad," replied Paganel; "an admirable poem which----"

Paganel could say no more. His eyes wandered, while a peal of Homeric
laughter rang in his ears.

"Insensate! fool!" cried Paganel, at last. "What! is it so? Is it not
a mere joke? Have I done this? It is the confusion of languages, as at
Babel. My friends! my friends! to start for India and arrive at Chili!
to learn Spanish and speak Portuguese! this is too much, and, if it
continues, I shall some day throw myself out of the window instead of
my cigar."

To hear Paganel take his blunder thus, to see his comical actions, it
was impossible to keep serious. Besides, he set the example himself.

"Oh, do not be troubled," replied Paganel. "The Portuguese and Spanish
resemble each other so much that I made a mistake. However, this very
resemblance will soon enable me to rectify my error, and in a short
time I will thank this worthy Patagonian in the language he speaks so
well."

Paganel was right, for he could soon exchange a few words with the
native. He even learned that his name was Thalcave, a word which
signifies in Araucanian "the thunderer." This surname was doubtless
given to him for his skill in the use of fire-arms.

Fortunately Thalcave solved the difficulty. This guide, who was
accustomed to conduct travelers along the Patagonian frontiers, and
was one of the most intelligent baqueanos of the country, engaged to
furnish Glenarvan all that his little party needed. He offered to take
him to a "tolderia" (encampment) of Indians, about four miles distant,
where they would find everything necessary for the expedition. This
proposal was made partly by gestures, partly by Spanish words which
Paganel succeeded in understanding. It was accepted, and Glenarvan and
his learned friend, taking leave of their companions, reascended the
stream under the guidance of the Patagonian.

Jacques Paganel proceeded from admiration to ecstasy. Exclamations
of delight continually escaped his lips, to the astonishment of the
Patagonian, who thought it very natural that there should be birds in
the air, swans on the lakes, and grass on the prairies. The geographer
had no reason to regret his walk, or complain of its length. He
scarcely believed himself started, or that the encampment would soon
come in sight.

The bargain concluded, Glenarvan took leave of his new "providers," as
Paganel expressed it, and returned to the encampment. His arrival was
welcomed by cries of joy at sight of the provisions and horses. Every
one ate with avidity. Robert partook of some nourishment; he had almost
entirely regained his strength, and the remainder of the day was passed
in perfect rest. Various subjects were alluded to: the absent dear
ones, the Duncan, Captain Mangles, his brave crew, and Harry Grant who
was, perhaps, not far distant.

As for Paganel, he did not leave the Indian. He became Thalcave's
shadow, and could not remain quiet in the presence of a real
Patagonian, in comparison with whom he would have passed for a dwarf.
He overwhelmed the grave Indian with Spanish phrases, to which the
latter quietly listened. The geographer studied this time without a
book, and was often heard repeating words aloud.

"Good, I know," said Paganel, and addressing his companions: "A change
in the weather is about to take place. We shall have a 'pampero.'"

He explained that this pampero is frequent on the Argentine Plains. It
is a very dry wind from the southwest. Thalcave was not mistaken, and
during the night, which was quite uncomfortable for people sheltered
with a simple poncho, the wind blew with great violence. The horses lay
down on the ground, and the men near them in a close group. Glenarvan
feared they would be delayed if the storm continued; but Paganel
reassured him after consulting his barometer.

"You talk like a book, Paganel," replied Glenarvan.

"And I am one," replied Paganel, "which you are free to consult as much
as you please."

He was not mistaken. At one o'clock in the morning the wind suddenly
subsided, and every one was able to enjoy an invigorating sleep. The
next morning they rose bright and fresh, especially Paganel, who
displayed great cheerfulness and animation.

During this passage across the continent, Lord Glenarvan watched with
scrupulous attention for the approach of the natives. He wished to
question them concerning Captain Grant, by the aid of the Patagonian,
with whom Paganel had begun to converse considerably. But they
followed a path little frequented by the Indians, for the trails over
the Pampas, which lead from the Argentine Republic to the Andes, are
situated too far to the north. If by chance a wandering horseman
appeared in the distance, he fled rapidly away, little caring to come
in contact with strangers.

Hitherto Thalcave had made no remark concerning the line so rigorously
followed. He understood, however, that if they kept no definite
course over the Pampas, they would not come to cities or villages.
Every morning they advanced towards the rising sun, without deviating
from the straight line, and every evening the setting sun was behind
them. In his capacity of guide, Thalcave must, therefore, have been
astonished to see that not only he did not guide them, but that they
guided him. Nevertheless, if he was astonished, with the reserve
natural to the Indians he made no remark. But to-day arriving at the
above-mentioned road, he stopped his horse, and turned towards Paganel.

Thalcave was silent, and gazed at the geographer with profound
surprise. He did not admit, however, that Paganel was joking the least
in the world. An Indian, with his natural seriousness, never imagines
that you are not speaking in earnest.

At this moment Glenarvan, rejoining Paganel, asked what Thalcave said,
and why he had stopped.

"That would be very difficult," answered Paganel, "for an Indian
understands nothing of geography."

"Ah, MacNabb," said Paganel, "you still doubt my Spanish!"

Paganel turned to the Patagonian, and began a discourse, frequently
interrupted for want of words and from the difficulty of explaining to
a half-ignorant savage details which were rather incomprehensible to
him.

The lesson in geography lasted more than half an hour. At last Paganel
ceased, wiped his face, which was wet with perspiration, and looked at
the Patagonian.

"We shall see," replied Paganel; "but, if he did not, I give it up."

Thalcave did not appear to hear him. Paganel already saw an ironical
smile forming upon the lips of the major, and, wishing to save
his reputation, had begun with renewed energy his geographical
demonstrations, when the Patagonian stopped him with a gesture.

Paganel, in his exultation over his pupil, immediately translated to
his companions the replies of the Indian.

Glenarvan requested Paganel to ask the Patagonian if he had heard
of any strangers falling into the hands of the Indians, which was
accordingly done.

As soon as this word was translated, Thalcave was surrounded by the
seven travelers, who gazed at him with questioning looks. Paganel,
excited and scarcely finding his words, resumed these interesting
interrogatories, while his eyes, fixed upon the grave Indian, strove
to anticipate his reply before it issued from his lips. Every word the
Patagonian said he repeated in English, so that his companions heard
the Indian speak, as it were, in their own language.

"And this prisoner?" inquired Paganel.

"You understand, my friends," said Paganel; "a courageous man!"

But Paganel had not finished his inquiries. Where was this prisoner?
What was he doing? When had Thalcave heard of him? All these questions
thronged his mind at once. He did not have to wait long for answers,
but learnt that the European was a slave of one of the Indian tribes
that scour the plains.

"But where was he last?" asked Paganel.

"That is to say, false in word and in deed," said Paganel, after
translating to his companions this beautiful metaphor of the Indian
language. "And can we rescue our friend?" he added.

"You speak of a prisoner," said Paganel; "but were there not three?"

Their progress was now somewhat slow and difficult; their next object
being to reach and cross the river Colorado, to which at length
their horses brought them. Here Paganel's first care was to bathe
"geographically" in its waters, which are colored by a reddish clay. He
was surprised to find the depth so great as it really was, this being
the result of the snow having melted rapidly under the first heat of
summer. The width likewise of this stream was so considerable that it
was almost impossible for their horses to swim across; but they happily
discovered a sort of weir-bridge, of wattles looped and fastened
together, which the Indians were in the habit of using; and by its aid
the little troop was enabled to pass over to the left bank, where they
rested for the night.

Early in the afternoon, the first traces of animals were
encountered--the bones of an innumerable drove of cattle, in whitened
heaps. These fragments did not extend in a winding line, such as
animals exhausted and falling one by one would leave behind them. Thus
no one, not even Paganel, knew how to explain this chain of skeletons
in a space comparatively circumscribed. He therefore questioned
Thalcave, who was not at a loss for a reply.

"What is this?" they asked, after Paganel had inquired of the Indian.

A few paces from the rancho, a hole was dug which served as a kitchen
and contained half-cooled embers. Within, there was a bench, a bed of
ox-hide, a saucepan, a spit, and a pot for boiling maté. The maté is
a drink very much in use in South America. It is the Indian's tea,
consisting of a decoction of leaves dried in the fire, and is imbibed
through a straw. At Paganel's request, Thalcave prepared several
cups of this beverage, which very agreeably accompanied the ordinary
eatables, and was declared excellent.

However, when Wilson said that the supply of water would not fail
he had not calculated for the unquenchable thirst that consumed his
companions all that day; and, when he added that they would meet with
some stream in their journey he had anticipated too much. Indeed, not
only were rivers wanting, but even the artificial wells dug by the
Indians were empty. On seeing these indications of dryness increase
from mile to mile, Paganel asked Thalcave where he expected to find
water.

If the major preserved his calmness in the midst of the petty
annoyances of life, Paganel, on the contrary, could not treat the
matter so indifferently. He fought the mosquitoes, and sadly regretted
the absence of his acid-water, which would have soothed the pain of
their bites. Although the major endeavored to console him, he awoke in
a very bad humor.

"What are these Indians?" inquired Paganel of Thalcave.

"Gauchos!" repeated Paganel, turning toward his companions, "Gauchos!
We had no need, then, to take such precautions. There was nothing to
fear!"

"Do you think so, Paganel?"

When each had sat down in the roukah, Paganel asked Thalcave's advice
as to what was best to be done. A rapid conversation, of which
Glenarvan caught a few words, ensued between the geographer and the
Indian. Thalcave spoke calmly, while Paganel gesticulated for both.
This consultation lasted a few minutes, and then the Patagonian folded
his arms.

"Yes, into two parties," replied Paganel. "Those of us whose horses are
so overcome with fatigue and thirst that they can scarcely move will
continue the journey as well as possible. Those who are better mounted,
on the contrary, will ride in advance, and reconnoitre the Guamini
River, which empties into Lake San Lucas. If there is sufficient water
there, they will wait for their companions on the banks of the stream;
if not, they will return to save the rest a useless journey."

"Oh, you, my dear Paganel!" replied the major, "you will remain with
the reserve detachment. You know the course, the Guamini River, and the
Pampas, too well to abandon us. Neither Wilson, Mulready, nor myself
are capable of rejoining Thalcave at his rendezvous, unless we advance
confidently under the guidance of the brave Jacques Paganel."

"You would deserve it, my intolerable major," said Paganel, smiling.
"But tell me, my dear Glenarvan, how will you understand Thalcave's
language?"

"Go then, my worthy friend," replied Paganel.

They ate supper without drink, which was rather unrefreshing, and then
fell asleep. Paganel dreamed of torrents, cascades, streams, rivers,
ponds, brooks, nay even full bottles, in short, of everything which
generally contains water. It was a real nightmare.

Thalcave and he urged their horses to a more rapid pace, and a few
moments afterwards they joined the party led by Paganel.

The Indian had not waited for these words of gratitude to embrace his
horse, but at that very moment he spoke to him and embraced him, as
if human blood flowed in the veins of the noble animal. Then, turning
towards Paganel, he pointed to young Robert.

After their first outbursts of joy at meeting were over, Paganel,
Austin, Wilson, and Mulready--all who had remained behind, except the
major--were conscious of one thing, namely, that they were suffering
from thirst. Fortunately, the Guamini flowed at no great distance.
They accordingly continued their journey, and at seven o'clock in the
morning the little party arrived at the ramada. On seeing its entrance
strewn with the bodies of the wolves, it was easy to understand the
violence of the attack and the vigor of the defense. The travelers,
after fully quenching their thirst, devoted their attention to
breakfast in the inclosure. The ostrich-steaks were declared excellent,
and the armadillo, roasted in its own covering, was a delicious dish.

"To eat reasonably of this," said Paganel, "would be ingratitude
towards Providence. We really must eat immoderately."

Frequently they skirted the shores of fresh-water lagoons, on whose
banks, in the shelter of the bushes, tiny wrens skipped and melodious
larks warbled, in company with the brilliant-plumaged tanagers. These
pretty birds gayly fluttered about, heedless of the haughty starlings
that strutted on the banks like soldiers with their epaulettes and red
breasts. In the thorny coppices the nests of the annubis swung like
hammocks, and on the shores of the lagoons magnificent flamingoes,
marching in regular file, spread their fiery-colored wings to the wind.
Their nests were seen, by thousands together, like a small village, in
the shape of truncated cones a foot high. The birds were not startled
at the approach of the travelers, which was contrary to Paganel's
calculations.

And Paganel, leaving his companions to go on, proceeded towards the
flock of flamingoes, followed by Robert and the major. Arriving within
range, Paganel fired a blank charge (for he would not needlessly
destroy even a bird), and all the flamingoes flew away, while the
geographer gazed at them attentively through his glasses.

When he had joined his companions, Paganel found Glenarvan in excited
conversation with the Indian, whom he did not appear to understand.
Thalcave had frequently stopped to examine the horizon, and each time
his countenance expressed a lively astonishment. Glenarvan, not seeing
his ordinary interpreter present, had attempted, but in vain, to
question the Patagonian. So, as soon as he perceived the geographer at
a distance, he cried,--

"Come, friend Paganel, Thalcave and I can scarcely succeed in
understanding each other."

Paganel conversed a few moments with the Indian, and, turning to
Glenarvan, said,--

[Illustration: Arriving within range, Paganel fired a blank charge (for
he would not needlessly destroy even a bird), and all the flamingoes
flew away, while the geographer gazed at them attentively through his
glasses.]

"I will see," replied Paganel.

"Ah! Gauchos," replied MacNabb. "Well, Paganel, what do you think of
these creatures?"

"I think they look like famous bandits," answered Paganel.

Paganel's avowal was followed by a general laugh, which did not
disconcert him at all.

Paganel explained all these particulars to his companions, and even
succeeded in interesting the major.

Paganel, after giving his companions a brief account of the village of
Tandil, added that they could not fail to obtain information there;
moreover, the fort was always garrisoned by a detachment of national
troops. Glenarvan, accordingly, put the horses into the stable of a
"fonda;" and Paganel, the major, Robert, and he, under the guidance of
Thalcave, proceeded towards Fort Independence.

Paganel was not astonished. He remembered his Argentine statistics, and
knew that in this country the average number of children in a family
exceeds nine. But what surprised him exceedingly was to see these
little soldiers practicing the French tactics, and to hear the orders
of the corporal given in his own native language.

But Glenarvan had not come to see boys drill, still less to occupy
himself with their nationality or relationship. He did not, therefore,
give Paganel time to express further astonishment, but besought him
to ask for the commander of the fortress. Paganel did so, and one of
the soldiers proceeded towards a small building which served as the
barracks.

Thalcave, addressing him, introduced Lord Glenarvan and his companions.
While he spoke, the commander kept scrutinizing Paganel with quite
embarrassing persistence. The geographer did not know what the trooper
meant, and was about to ask him, when the latter unceremoniously seized
his hand, and said, in a joyous tone, in his own language,--

"Yes, a Frenchman," replied Paganel.

"One of your friends?" asked the major of Paganel.

Paganel, opening the conversation in French, told him of their journey
across the Pampas, and ended by asking why the Indians had abandoned
the country.

Paganel, MacNabb, Robert, and he now surrounded the sergeant.

"An Italian who was massacred by the Indians?" cried Paganel.

"My friends," answered Paganel, taking Robert's hands, "we must submit
to a severe misfortune. We have followed a false trail! The captive
in question is not the captain, but one of my countrymen (whose
companion, Marco Vazello, was actually assassinated by the Indians),
a Frenchman who often accompanied these cruel savages to the banks of
the Colorado, and who, after fortunately escaping from their hands,
returned to France. While thinking that we were on the track of Captain
Grant, we have fallen upon that of young Guinnard."

Glenarvan was in despair at this complete overthrow of his hopes.
Robert walked beside him in silence, with tearful eyes, while his
protector could not find a single word to console him. Paganel
gesticulated and talked to himself. The major did not open his lips.
As for Thalcave, his Indian pride seemed humbled at having gone astray
on a false trail. No one, however, thought of reproaching him for so
excusable an error.

[Illustration: More than once during the journey, the attention and
interest of all, but especially of Paganel, were arrested by the
curious illusion of the mirage.]

In the meantime, Paganel had asked Glenarvan for the document, by
relying on which their search had resulted so unfortunately. He
read it again with unconcealed vexation, seeking to discover a new
interpretation.

"No," replied the geographer, stamping with his foot, "a hundred times
no! Since Captain Grant is not on the Pampas, he is not in America.
This document ought to tell where he is; and it shall, my friends, or I
am no longer Jacques Paganel."

Glenarvan, with Robert at his side, galloped on in silence. His
lordship's bold and resolute character did not permit him to accept
this disappointment calmly. His heart beat violently, and his brain was
on fire. Paganel, tormented by the mystery of the document, arranged
the words in every way, as if to draw from them a new meaning. Thalcave
silently resigned himself to Thaouka's sagacity. The major, always
confident, performed his duties like a man upon whom discouragement can
have no effect. Tom Austin and his two sailors shared their master's
annoyance. Once, when a timid hare crossed the path in front of them,
the superstitious Scotchmen gazed at one another.

More than once during the journey the attention and interest of all,
but especially of Paganel, were arrested by the curious illusion of
the mirage, by which was presented in the sky, at the limits of the
horizon, a semblance of the estancias, the poplars and willows near
them, and other objects; the images being so much like the reality that
it required a strong effort to realize their deceptive character.

"Monsieur Paganel! Monsieur Paganel! A forest of horns!"

"A field! you are dreaming, my boy," said Paganel, shrugging his
shoulders.

"This is something singular," replied Paganel, turning towards the
Indian with a questioning look.

"What!" cried Paganel, "is there a whole drove in this mire?"

These manoeuvres, many times repeated, puzzled Paganel and annoyed
Glenarvan. The geographer was accordingly requested to interrogate
the Indian, which he did at once. Thalcave replied that he was
astonished to see the plain so soaked with moisture. Never within his
recollection, since he had performed the office of guide, had his feet
trodden a soil so saturated. Even in the season of the great rains the
Argentine plain was always easily passed.

"But to what do you attribute this increasing moisture?" asked Paganel.

Paganel was forced to be contented with this answer, and communicated
to Glenarvan the result of the conversation.

"What is to be done?" asked Paganel of the Patagonian.

The supper was very meagre and comfortless, and every one's appetite
failed. The major alone did justice to the water-soaked repast, and did
not lose a mouthful: he was superior to misfortune. As for Paganel,
like a Frenchman, he tried to joke; but now he failed.

The rain had ceased, but the hard earth held what had fallen. On the
impenetrable clay, pools, marshes, and ponds overflowed and formed
immense "bañados" of treacherous depth. Paganel, on consulting his map,
judged rightly that the Grande and Nivarota Rivers, into which the
waters of the plain usually flow, must have mingled together in one
broad stream.

"What is the matter with Thaouka?" asked Paganel. "Has he been bitten
by those voracious blood-suckers of the Argentine waters?"

"What is it?" said Paganel.

"The inundation!" cried Paganel; and his companions, with him at their
head, fled away in the track of Thaouka.

Meantime the horses, immersed to their breasts, could no longer
advance without extreme difficulty. Glenarvan, Paganel, Austin, all
believed themselves lost, victims of the horrible death of unfortunates
abandoned at sea. Their animals began to lose their footing; six feet
of water was sufficient to drown them.

"Courage! courage!" cried Glenarvan, who supported Paganel with one arm
and swam with the other.

"Do you abandon him?" said Paganel.

A moment after, Robert and the sailor descended the three stories
of branches and found themselves among their companions. Glenarvan,
Paganel, the major, Austin, and Mulready were seated astraddle, or
dangling in the branches, according to their own inclinations. Wilson
gave an account of their visit to the top of the tree. All shared his
opinion in regard to Thalcave. The only question was, whether Thalcave
would save Thaouka, or Thaouka Thalcave.

"Build our nest, of course," replied Paganel.

"I should not have thought of this," said Paganel, innocently; "but I
am so absent-minded!"

"Or that we shall find some means of gaining _terra firma_," added
Paganel.

"Why, we must make one," replied Paganel.

"We will manage that," answered Paganel; "a little dry moss, a ray of
sunlight, the lens of my telescope, and you will see by what a fire I
will dry myself. Who will go for wood in the forest?"

During their absence Paganel found dry moss in sufficient quantity; he
availed himself of a ray of sunlight, which was easy, for the orb of
day now shone with a vivid brightness, and then, with the aid of his
lens, he kindled without difficulty the combustible materials which
were laid on a bed of leaves in the fork of the branches. It was a
natural fireplace, with no danger of conflagration.

Wilson and Robert soon returned with an armful of dead wood, which was
cast on the fire. Paganel, to cause a draught, placed himself above the
fireplace, his long legs crossed in the Arab fashion; then, moving his
body rapidly up and down, he produced, by means of his poncho, a strong
current of air. The wood kindled, and a bright, roaring flame soon rose
from this improvised oven. Each dried himself in his own way, while the
ponchos, hung on the branches, swung to and fro in the breeze.

"Since the kitchen and dining-room are on the ground floor," said
Paganel, "we will sleep in the first story. The house is large, the
rent reasonable, and we must take our ease. I perceive that above there
are natural cradles, in which, when we have once laid ourselves, we
shall sleep as well as in the best beds in the world. We have nothing
to fear; moreover, we will keep watch, and there are enough of us to
repulse all the wild animals."

"What use," continued Tom Austin, "if Mr. Paganel does not find the
means of manufacturing powder?"

"Where did you get that, major?" inquired Paganel.

"I desire that the horse be not forgotten," said Paganel. "He forms
part of the Patagonian, and, if I am not greatly mistaken, we shall see
them again."

"Not more than forty miles," answered Paganel. "And now, my friends,
since each is free to act, I ask permission to leave you. I am going to
choose an observatory above, and, with the aid of my telescope, will
keep you acquainted with what goes on here."

[Illustration: Glenarvan, Paganel, the major, Austin, and Mulready were
seated astraddle, or dangling in the branches, according to their own
inclinations.]

"That is Paganel's business," replied Glenarvan.

"Nothing easier," replied Paganel; "I need not even disturb myself to
tell you."

This last sentence was not finished. Did the geographer hesitate?
Did he know no more? No; but a startling cry was heard in the top of
the tree. Glenarvan and his friends grew pale as they gazed at each
other. Had a new calamity happened? Had the unfortunate Paganel fallen?
Already Wilson and Mulready were hastening to his assistance, when a
long body appeared. Paganel dangled from branch to branch. His hands
could grasp nothing. Was he alive, or dead? They did not know; but
he was about to fall into the roaring waters, when the major, with a
strong hand, arrested his progress.

"Very much obliged, MacNabb!" cried Paganel.

[Illustration: A long body appeared. Paganel dangled from branch to
branch. His hands could grasp nothing. Was he alive, or dead?]

"Yes, yes," replied Paganel, in a voice choked with emotion (and
leaves). "Yes, a distraction,--phenomenal this time."

"Glenarvan, major, Robert, my friends," cried Paganel, "all you who
hear me, we are seeking Captain Grant where he is not."

"Not only where he is not," added Paganel, "but even where he has never
been."

A profound astonishment greeted these unexpected words. What did the
geographer mean? Had he lost his senses? He spoke, however, with
such conviction that all eyes were turned towards Glenarvan. This
declaration of Paganel was a direct answer to the question the former
had asked. But Glenarvan confined himself to a negative gesture,
indicating disbelief in the geographer, who, as soon as he was master
of his emotion, resumed.

"Explain yourself, Paganel," said the major; "and more calmly."

"I pretend," replied Paganel, "that the word _Austral_ in the document
is not complete, as we have hitherto supposed, but the root of the word
_Australia_."

"Impossible," continued Paganel, "is a word that we do not allow in
France."

"I am sure of it!" replied Paganel.

"By my faith, Paganel," said Glenarvan, "this is a pretension that
astonishes me greatly, coming from the secretary of a geographical
society."

"Why?" inquired Paganel, touched in his sensitive point.

Paganel was by no means surprised at this argument. He seemingly
expected it, and began to smile.

"I ask nothing better. Defeat me, Paganel."

It must be confessed that Glenarvan now gazed fixedly at Paganel.

"Bravo, Paganel!" said the major.

"No," cried Paganel, "it certainly does not mean Patagonia. Read
anything you will but that."

"That is indifferent to me," replied Paganel; "the word has no
importance. I shall not even search for what it may signify. The
principal point is that _Austral_ means Australia, and we must have
been blindly following a false trail, not to have discovered before so
evident a meaning. If I had found the document, if my judgment had not
been set aside by your interpretation, I should never have understood
it otherwise."

This time cheers, congratulations, and compliments greeted Paganel's
words. Austin, the sailors, the major, and Robert especially, were
delighted to revive their hopes, and applauded the worthy geographer.
Glenarvan, who had gradually been undeceived, was, as he said, almost
ready to surrender.

"One last remark, my dear Paganel, and I have only to bow before your
sagacity."

"Nothing is easier. Here is the document," said Paganel, producing the
precious paper that he had studied so conscientiously for several
days. A profound silence ensued, while the geographer, collecting his
thoughts, took his time to answer. His finger followed the incomplete
lines on the document, while, in a confident tone, he expressed himself
in the following terms:

"Do you know, Paganel," added Glenarvan, "that your presence on board
the Duncan is a providential circumstance?"

"Well," replied Paganel, "let us suppose that I am an envoy of
Providence, and say no more about it."

It was now four o'clock in the afternoon, and they resolved to take
supper at six. Paganel wished to celebrate this joyful day by a
splendid banquet. As the bill of fare was very limited, he proposed
to Robert that they should go hunting "in the neighboring forest,"
at which idea the boy clapped his hands. They took Thalcave's
powder-flask, cleaned the revolvers, loaded them with fine shot, and
started.

While Glenarvan and the major were making these observations, reports
resounded in the tree, accompanied by cries of joy almost as noisy.
The clear treble of Robert contrasted sharply with the deep bass of
Paganel, and the strife was which should be the most boyish. The hunt
promised well, and gave hopes of culinary wonders.

At this moment the hunters descended from the top of the tree. Paganel
carefully carried some black swallows' eggs and a string of sparrows,
which he meant afterwards to serve up as larks. Robert had adroitly
brought down several pairs of "hilgueros,"--little green-and-yellow
birds, which are excellent eating, and very much in demand in the
Montevideo market. The geographer, who knew many ways of preparing
eggs, had to confine himself this time to cooking them in the hot
ashes. However, the repast was as varied as it was delicate. The dried
meat, the hard eggs, the broiled mojarras, and the roast sparrows and
hilgueros, formed a repast which was long remembered.

The conversation was very animated. Paganel was greatly complimented in
his twofold capacity of hunter and cook, and accepted these encomiums
with the modesty that belongs to true merit. Then he gave himself up to
singular observations on the magnificent tree that sheltered them with
its foliage, and whose extent, as he declared, was immense.

"Ha! this time, Paganel," said the major, "you will not make me admit
the utility of ferocious beasts. What are they good for?"

"Major," cried Paganel, "they are good to form classifications, orders,
families, genera, sub-genera, species----"

"Should you have done so?" inquired Paganel.

"This is shocking," continued Paganel; "for my part, I should have
preserved all the animals before the deluge of which we are so
unfortunately deprived."

"I tell you that Noah was wrong," retorted Paganel, "and deserves the
malediction of scholars to the end of time."

The listeners to this argument could not help laughing at seeing the
two friends dispute about what Noah ought to have done or left undone.
The major, who had never argued with any one in his life, contrary to
all his principles, was every day at war with Paganel, who must have
particularly excited him.

"However much it is to be regretted, in a scientific or human point of
view, that we are deprived of ferocious animals, we must be resigned
to-day to their absence. Paganel could not hope to encounter any in
this aerial forest."

"However that may be, my good Paganel," said Glenarvan, "so long as
there are no Indians, mulattoes, or negroes among us, I rejoice in
the absence of your dear jaguars. Our situation is not, of course, so
agreeable----"

"What!" cried Paganel, "you complain of your lot?"

"Glenarvan," said Paganel, "we must take things as they come. If
favorable, so much the better; if unfavorable, we must not mind it. I
see you long for the comforts of Malcolm Castle."

"I am certain that Robert is perfectly happy," interrupted Paganel, to
secure one advocate, at least, of his theories.

"Yes, Monsieur Paganel!" cried the boy, in a joyful tone.

"Well," said the major, "here is Paganel going to make an attack upon
riches and gilded splendor."

"No, my dear major," continued Paganel; "but, if you wish, I will tell
you, in this connection, a little Arab story that occurs to me."

"Yes, yes, Monsieur Paganel," cried Robert.

"There was once upon a time," said Paganel, "a son of the great
Haroun-al-Raschid who was not happy. He accordingly consulted an old
dervish, who told him that happiness was a very difficult thing to
find in this world. 'However,' added he, 'I know an infallible way
to procure you happiness.' 'What is it?' inquired the young prince.
'It is,' replied the dervish, 'to put on the shirt of a happy man.'
Thereupon the prince embraced the old man, and set out in search of his
talisman. He visited all the capitals of the earth; he tried the shirts
of kings, emperors, princes, and nobles; but it was a useless task, he
was no happier. Then he put on the shirts of artists, warriors, and
merchants, but with no more success. He had thus traveled far, without
finding happiness. At last, desperate from having tried so many shirts,
he was returning very sadly one beautiful day to the palace of his
father, when he spied in the field an honest laborer, who was joyously
singing as he ploughed. 'Here is, at all events, a man who possesses
happiness,' said he to himself, 'or happiness does not exist on earth.'
He approached him. 'Good man,' said he, 'are you happy?' 'Yes,' replied
the other. 'You wish for nothing?' 'No.' 'You would not change your lot
for that of a king?' 'Never!' 'Well, sell me your shirt!' 'My shirt! I
have none!'"

Jacques Paganel's story had a very great success. He was greatly
applauded, but each retained his own opinion, and the geographer
obtained the result common to most discussions,--of convincing nobody.
However, they were agreed on this point, that it was necessary to have
courage for every fortune, and be contented with a tree when one has
neither palace nor cottage.

But before "retiring to their nest," as Paganel said, Glenarvan,
Robert, and he climbed to the observatory, to examine for the last
time the watery expanse. It was about nine o'clock. The sun had just
set in the sparkling mists of the horizon, and all the western part
of the firmament was bathed in a warm vapor. The constellations,
usually so dazzling, seemed veiled in a soft haze. Still they could
be distinguished, and Paganel pointed out to Robert, for Glenarvan's
benefit, that zone where the stars are most brilliant.

While the geographer was discoursing thus, the whole eastern horizon
assumed a stormy aspect. A dense and dark band, clearly defined,
gradually rose, dimming the light of the stars. This cloud of
threatening appearance soon invaded almost the entire vault of the sky.
Its motive power must have been inherent in itself, for there was not
a breath of wind. Not a leaf stirred on the tree, not a ripple curled
the surface of the waters. Even the air seemed to fail, as if some
huge pneumatic machine had rarefied it. A strong electric current was
perceptible in the atmosphere, and every creature felt it course along
the nerves. Glenarvan, Paganel, and Robert were sensibly affected by
these electric currents.

"We shall have a storm," said Paganel.

"And it will be violent," continued Paganel, "so far as I can judge
from the state of the sky."

"It is not the storm that troubles me," said Glenarvan, "but the
torrents of rain with which it will be accompanied. We shall be
drenched to the skin again. Whatever you may say, Paganel, a nest
cannot suffice a man, as you will soon learn to your cost."

"No," replied Paganel, "but phosphorescent insects, real
glow-worms,--living diamonds, and not expensive, of which the ladies of
Buenos Ayres make magnificent ornaments for themselves."

Robert caught one of the brilliant creatures. Paganel was right. It
was a kind of large beetle, an inch in length, to which the Indians
give the name of "tuco-tuco." This curious insect threw out flashes at
two points situated in front of its sheath, and its light would have
enabled one to read in the darkness. Paganel, on bringing it close to
his watch, saw that it was ten o'clock.

"What do you think, Glenarvan?" asked Paganel.

"So much the better," replied the enthusiastic Paganel. "I like a fine
spectacle, especially when I cannot avoid it. Only one thing would make
me anxious, if anxiety served to avert danger," added he, "and that
is, that the culminating point of this plain is the ombu upon which we
are perched. A lightning-conductor would be very useful here, for this
very tree among all those of the Pampas is the one that particularly
attracts the lightning. And then, as you are aware, my friends,
meteorologists advise us not to take refuge under trees during a storm."

"It must be confessed, Paganel," replied Glenarvan, "that you choose a
good time to tell us these encouraging things!"

"Bah!" replied Paganel; "all times are good to receive information. Ah,
it is beginning!"

Glenarvan and his companions watched this terrific spectacle in
silence. Sheets of dazzling light glided towards them, and blinding
flashes followed in rapid succession, now showing the calm countenance
of the major, then the speculative face of Paganel or the energetic
features of Glenarvan, and again the frightened look of Robert or the
unconcerned expression of the sailors. The rain, however, did not fall
as yet, nor had the wind risen. But soon the flood-gates of the heavens
opened, and the rain came down in torrents, the drops, as they struck
the surface of the water, rebounding in thousands of sparks illuminated
by the incessant lightning.

Glenarvan, Robert, the major, Paganel, and the sailors, were terrified.
A thick smoke was stifling them; an intolerable heat was scorching
them. The fire was extending to the lower part of the tree on their
side; nothing could stop or extinguish it; and they felt themselves
irrevocably doomed to the torture of those victims who are confined
within the burning sides of a sacrificial fire-basket.

"Caymans! caymans!" replied Wilson. And, in truth, the foot of the
tree was seen to be surrounded by the most formidable monsters.
Their scales glittered in broad plates of light, sharply defined
by the conflagration. Their flat tails, their pointed heads, their
protruding eyes, their jaws, extending back of their ears, all these
characteristic signs were unmistakable. Paganel recognized the
voracious alligators peculiar to America, and called caymans in Spanish
countries. There were a dozen of them, beating the water with their
powerful tails, and attacking the tree with their terrible teeth.

For two hours the tree floated on the immense lake without reaching
_terra firma_. The flames had gradually died out, and thus the
principal danger of this terrible voyage had vanished. The current,
still keeping its original direction, flowed from southwest to
northeast; the darkness, though illumined now and then by flashes, had
become profound, and Paganel sought in vain for his bearings. But the
storm was abating, the large drops of rain gave place to light spray
that was scattered by the wind, while the huge distended clouds were
crossed by light bands.

"Land! land!" cried Paganel, in ringing tones.

Thalcave, in a few words, told his story to Paganel, and ascribed to
his intrepid horse all the honor of having saved him. Paganel then
endeavored to explain to him the new interpretation of the document,
and the hopes it led them to entertain. Did the Indian understand the
geographer's ingenious suppositions? It was very doubtful; but he saw
his friends happy and very confident, and he desired nothing more.

Then an idea occurred to him. Paganel called himself a nyctalops; he
could see in the night.

"My eyes?" replied Paganel, rubbing them vigorously.

"And why my eyes?" said Paganel to himself, delighted, nevertheless, to
be of service to Glenarvan.

He rose, shaking his torpid limbs in the manner of one awakened from
sleep, and followed his friend along the shore. Glenarvan requested
him to survey the dark horizon to seaward. For several moments Paganel
conscientiously devoted himself to this task.

"I see neither a red nor a green light. All is darkness," replied
Paganel, whose eyes were thereupon involuntarily closed.

Glenarvan, provided with Paganel's telescope, watched the movements of
the Duncan. Captain Mangles could not have perceived them, for he did
not approach, but continued to coast along with only a reefed top-sail.

Then Robert, Paganel, the major, Tom Austin, and the two sailors
bade an affectionate adieu to the noble Patagonian, who clasped each
one in succession to his broad breast. All were sincerely sorry at
parting with so courageous and devoted a friend. Paganel forced him
to accept a map of South America and the two oceans, which the
Indian had frequently examined with interest. It was the geographer's
most precious possession. As for Robert, he had nothing to give but
caresses, which he freely lavished upon his deliverer and upon Thaouka.

"Shall we ever see each other again?" asked Paganel.

After the first embraces, all were informed of the principal incidents
of the journey; and, first of all, Glenarvan made known the new
interpretation of the document, due to the sagacity of Jacques Paganel.
He also praised Robert, of whom his sister had a right to be proud.
His courage, his devotion, and the dangers that he had overcome, were
conspicuously set forth by his noble friend, so that the boy would not
have known where to hide himself, if his sister's arms had not afforded
him a sure refuge.

They then spoke of the generous Thalcave. Lady Helena regretted that
she could not have shaken hands with the brave Indian. MacNabb, after
the first outbursts of enthusiasm, repaired to his cabin to shave
himself. As for Paganel, he flitted hither and thither, like a bee,
extracting the honey of compliments and smiles. He wished to embrace
all on board the Duncan, and, beginning with Lady Helena and Mary
Grant, ended with Mr. Olbinett, the steward, who could not better
recognize such politeness than by announcing breakfast.

"Yes, Mr. Paganel," replied Olbinett.

"Oh, Mr. Paganel!" replied the worthy steward, greatly embarrassed.

"Well, we will test its reality, Monsieur Paganel," replied Lady
Helena, who could not help laughing.

The passengers and the young captain then descended to the cabin.
Orders were given to the engineer to keep up steam, that they might
start at the first signal. The major and the travelers, after a rapid
toilette, seated themselves at the table. Ample justice was done to
Mr. Olbinett's repast, which was declared excellent and even superior
to the splendid banquets of the Pampas. Paganel called twice for every
dish, "through absent-mindedness," as he said. This unfortunate word
led Lady Helena to inquire if the amiable Frenchman had occasionally
shown his habitual failing. The major and Lord Glenarvan looked at each
other with a smile. As for Paganel, he laughed heartily, and promised
"upon his honor" not to commit a single blunder during the entire
voyage. He then in a very comical way told the story of his mistake in
the study of Spanish.

"By my faith, I should not have thought of that," replied MacNabb. "My
compliments, Paganel, my sincere compliments!"

Paganel was applauded, but did not lose a single mouthful. He did not,
however, notice one peculiarity observed by Glenarvan, and that was the
young captain's attentions to his neighbor, Mary Grant. A slight sign
from Lady Helena to her husband told him how matters stood. He gazed at
the two young people with affectionate sympathy, and finally addressed
the captain, but upon a different subject.

"What!" cried Paganel, "you doubled Cape Horn, and I was not there!"

"Well, my dear Paganel," added Glenarvan, "unless we are endowed with
ubiquity, we cannot be everywhere. Since you crossed the Pampas, you
could not at the same time double Cape Horn."

When breakfast was over, the party repaired to Lady Helena's
state-room, and, taking seats around a table loaded with maps and
charts, resumed the conversation. Glenarvan explained that the
shipwreck had not taken place on the shores either of the Pacific or
the Atlantic, and that, consequently, the document had been wrongly
interpreted so far as Patagonia was concerned; that Paganel, by a
sudden inspiration, had discovered the mistake and proved that they had
been following a false trail. The geographer was accordingly asked to
explain the French document, which he did to the satisfaction of every
one. When he had finished his demonstration, Glenarvan announced that
the Duncan would immediately set sail for Australia.

"My object," said MacNabb, "is not to invalidate the arguments of my
friend Paganel, still less to refute them. I consider them rational,
sagacious, and worthy of our whole attention. But I desire to submit
them to a final examination, that their validity may be incontestable."

[Illustration: "My object," said MacNabb, "is not to invalidate the
arguments of my friend Paganel, still less to refute them."]

"Go on, major," said Paganel: "I am ready to answer all your questions."

"Afterwards," resumed the major, "when Paganel, in a moment of
providential absent-mindedness, embarked on board our vessel, the
documents were submitted to him, and he unhesitatingly sanctioned our
search upon the American coast."

"Yes, we are mistaken," repeated Paganel; "but to be mistaken is only
to be human, while it is the part of a madman to persist in his error."

"Wait, Paganel," continued the major; "do not get excited. I do not
mean that our search ought to be prolonged in America."

Glenarvan and Paganel glanced at each other. The major's remarks were
strictly correct.

"Nothing is easier," replied Paganel.

The map was placed before Lady Helena, and all showed themselves ready
to follow Paganel's demonstration. After carefully examining the
documents, it was unanimously agreed that Paganel's interpretation was
the correct one.

"In what direction?" asked Paganel.

"Ah!" replied Paganel, struck with the idea, and shortly with the
reality also; for there was the barren mountain-top of Tristan d'Acunha.

[Illustration: Inasmuch as this was sufficient to cook fish,
Paganel decided that it was not necessary for him to bathe here
"geographically."] of these that the Duncan called. Inquiry was made
of the authorities (for these islets are governed by a British official
from the Cape of Good Hope) if there were any tidings of the Britannia.
But nothing was known of such a ship; they were told of the shipwrecks
which had occurred, but there was nothing that afforded a clue to that
which they sought. They spent some hours in examination of the fauna
and flora, which were not very extensive. They saw and were seen by the
sparse population that subsist here, and in the afternoon of the same
day the yacht left the islands and islanders so rarely visited.

Desolate as these lonely islands appeared to our travelers, they still
were not devoid of objects of interest. They were meagre enough in
vegetation and in animal life; but there were warm springs which well
repaid a visit. Captain Mangles found the temperature of their waters
to be 166° Fahrenheit; and, inasmuch as this was sufficient to cook
fish, Paganel decided that it was not necessary for him to bathe here
"geographically."

When they resumed their course, though many miles were before them,
there was a growing sense of anticipation; they were not to pause again
until the "Australian continent" was reached; and more and more did
the conversation and discussions tend towards this continent as their
subject. On one occasion so certain was Paganel as to the ease with
which they would be able to pursue their search, when they arrived,
that he asserted that more than fifty geographers had already made the
course clear for them.

"Major," said Paganel, "will you wager your rifle against my telescope
that I cannot name at least fifty Australian explorers?"

"Of course, Paganel, if you like," replied MacNabb, seeing that he
could not now recede from his position without incurring the ridicule
of the company.

[Illustration: "Major," said Paganel, "will you wager your rifle
against my telescope that I cannot name at least fifty Australian
explorers?"]

"Well, then," said Paganel to Lady Helena and Miss Grant, "come and
be umpires, and Master Robert shall count for us." And forthwith the
learned geographer opened his budget, and poured forth the history of
the discovery of Australia, with the names of its discoverers and the
dates of their explorations, as fluently as though his sole calling in
life was to be professor of Australian history. Rapidly he mentioned
the first twenty who found or traversed the Austral shores; as rapidly
did the names of the second score flow from his lips; and after the
prescribed fifty had been enumerated, he kept on as though his list
were inexhaustible.

"Enough, enough, Monsieur Paganel!" said Lady Helena. "You have shown
that there is nothing, great or small, about Australia, of which you
are ignorant."

The young captain accordingly remained on deck all night. About eleven
o'clock the sky grew threatening towards the south. All hands were
immediately called on deck, to take in the sails. At midnight the wind
freshened. The creaking of the masts, the rattling of the rigging,
and the groaning of bulkheads informed the passengers of the state of
affairs. Paganel, Glenarvan, the major, and Robert came on deck to
render assistance if it should be needed. Over the sky, that they had
left clear and studded with stars, now rolled thick clouds broken by
light bands and spotted like the skin of a leopard.

Glenarvan, the major, Paganel, and Robert gazed with admiration and
terror at this struggle with the waves. They clung tightly to the
rigging, unable to exchange a word, and watched the flocks of stormy
petrels, those melancholy birds of the storm, as they sported in the
raging winds.

Glenarvan returned to the ladies, who, without knowing all the danger,
felt it to be imminent. They displayed, however, a noble courage, equal
at least to that of their companions. Paganel gave himself up to the
most unreasonable theories concerning the direction of atmospheric
currents, while the major awaited the end with the indifference of a
Mussulman.

But here one of Paganel's ingenious suppositions failed. So long as
they were in the Argentine territory, the geographer could rightly
maintain that the latitude of the document referred to the place of
captivity,--not to the scene of the shipwreck. Indeed, the great rivers
of the Pampas and their numerous affluents could easily bear the
document to the sea. In this part of Australia, on the contrary, few
streams cross the thirty-seventh parallel, and the principal Australian
rivers--the Murray, the Yara, the Torrens, and the Darling--either flow
into each other, or empty into the ocean by mouths where navigation
is active. What probability was there, then, that a fragile bottle
could have descended these continually navigated waters, and reached
the Indian Ocean? This consideration could not escape such sagacious
minds. Paganel's supposition, plausible in Patagonia, was illogical
in Australia. The geographer perceived this in a discussion on the
subject with the major. It was clear that the latitude applied only to
the place of shipwreck, and that consequently the bottle had been cast
into the sea where the Britannia was wrecked,--on the western coast of
Australia.

This resolution occasioned profound grief to the children of the lost
captain. As the boats containing the whole of the party were rowed
ashore, they felt that the fate of their father would soon be probably
decided; irrevocably, we may say, for Paganel, in a former discussion,
had clearly demonstrated that the shipwrecked seamen would have reached
their country long ago, if their vessel had stranded on the other, the
eastern coast.

Glenarvan and his companions entered this opening, and reached the
summit of the cliffs by a very steep ascent. Robert climbed an abrupt
declivity with the agility of a cat, and arrived first at the top,
to the great chagrin of Paganel, who was quite mortified at seeing
himself outstripped by a mere lad of twelve. However, he distanced the
peaceable major; but that worthy was utterly indifferent to his defeat.

The little party surveyed the plain that stretched out beneath them.
It was a vast, uncultivated tract, covered with bushes and brushwood,
and was compared by Glenarvan to the glens of the Scottish lowlands,
and by Paganel to the barren lands of Brittany. But though the country
along the coast was evidently uninhabited, the presence of man, not the
savage, but the civilized worker, was betokened by several substantial
structures in the distance.

"It is indeed a mill," replied Paganel. "Here is a beacon as modest as
it is useful, the sight of which delights my eyes."

These words produced a gloomy impression upon his hearers. Robert and
Mary listened to them with tearful eyes. Paganel could not find a word
of consolation or hope. Captain Mangles suffered a grief that he could
not subdue. Despair was seizing upon the souls of the noble people whom
the Duncan had vainly brought to these distant shores, when all at once
a voice was heard:--

Mary Grant, half fainting with emotion, and overcome with happiness,
sank into the arms of Lady Helena; while Captain Mangles, Robert, and
Paganel went towards the man whom their host had called Ayrton.

"And we will seek, find, and save him, my friend!" cried Paganel. "Ah,
precious document!" added he, with perfect simplicity: "it must be
confessed that you have fallen into the hands of very sagacious people."

No one noticed these flattering words of Paganel. Glenarvan, Lady
Helena, Mary, and Robert had crowded around Ayrton, and eagerly clasped
his hands. It seemed as if the presence of this man was a guarantee of
the safety of Harry Grant. Since the sailor had escaped the dangers
of shipwreck, why should not the captain be safe and sound? Ayrton
repeated his declaration that if Captain Grant were living he must be
in Australia. He answered with remarkable intelligence and clearness
the many questions that were propounded to him. Miss Mary, while
he spoke, held one of his hands in her own. This sailor had been a
companion of her father, one of the shipwrecked survivors of the
Britannia. He had lived with Harry Grant, had sailed the seas with him,
had braved the same dangers! She could not withdraw her eyes from that
weather-beaten face, and she wept with happiness.

The quartermaster now told the story of the Britannia and her voyage
across the Pacific. During the period of a year Harry Grant landed
at the principal ports of Oceanica, opposing unjustifiable captures,
and often a victim to the hostility of unjust traders. He found,
however, an important point on the western coast of Papua. Here the
establishment of a Scottish colony appeared to him feasible, and its
prosperity assured. After examining Papua, the Britannia sailed to
Callao for provisions, and left that port on the 30th of May, 1862, to
return to Europe by the way of the Indian Ocean and the Cape. Three
weeks after her departure, a terrible tempest disabled her. It became
necessary to cut away the masts. A leak was discovered in the hold,
which they did not succeed in stopping. The crew were soon overtasked
and exhausted. The pumps could not be worked. For eight days the
vessel was at the mercy of the storm. There were six feet of water
in her hold, and she gradually foundered. The boats had been washed
overboard, and the crew had given themselves up for lost, when on the
night of June 22nd, as Paganel had rightly interpreted, they descried
the eastern coast of Australia. The vessel soon stranded. A violent
shock was felt. At this moment Ayrton, borne by a wave, was cast into
the midst of the breakers, and lost all consciousness. When he came to
himself, he was in the hands of the natives, who carried him into the
interior of the country. Since then he had heard nothing more of the
Britannia, and naturally supposed that she had been wrecked, with all
on board, on the dangerous reefs of Twofold Bay.

"You repeat, Mr. Ayrton, the arguments that I have already
substantiated," said Paganel. "The shipwrecked seamen are evidently
prisoners of the natives, as they feared. But ought we to suppose that,
like you, they have been carried to the north?"

A prolonged silence followed this remark. Lady Helena frequently
cast a questioning glance at her companions, but without eliciting a
responsive sign. Paganel himself was silent, contrary to his custom.
His usual ingenuity now failed him. Captain Mangles paced the room with
long strides, as if he had been on the deck of his vessel, involved in
some difficulty.

"Well, let the yacht go to Melbourne," said Paganel, "and we will go
without her to Twofold Bay."

"So practicable," said Paganel, "that I propose that Lady Helena and
Miss Grant accompany us."

"Do you speak seriously, Paganel?" asked Glenarvan.

"Mr. Paganel is perfectly right," said O'Moore; "they have all left the
southern provinces. Since I have lived on this farm, I have not heard
of one."

"You see, my friends," continued Paganel, "that there are few savages,
no wild beasts, and no convicts. There are not many countries of Europe
of which we could say as much. Well, is it agreed?"

It was not Glenarvan's habit to lose time in adopting and executing a
plan. As soon as Paganel's proposal was accepted, he at once resolved
that the preparations for the journey should be completed as soon as
possible.

As for the men, seven strong horses were apportioned to Lord
Glenarvan, Paganel, Robert Grant, Major MacNabb, Captain Mangles,
and the two sailors, Wilson and Mulready, who accompanied this new
expeditionary party. The horses and oxen grazed near at hand, and could
be easily collected at the moment of departure.

"That Ayrton is an intelligent man," said Paganel to the major.

Lady Helena and Mary Grant now made their last preparations, which were
short and less minute than those of Jacques Paganel. The geographer
passed half the night in unscrewing, cleaning, and screwing on again
the lenses of his telescope. He was still asleep the next morning, when
the major awoke him early with a loud summons.

[Illustration: Ayrton and Olbinett took their places respectively in
front and in the rear part of the cart, while Glenarvan, the major,
Paganel, Robert, Captain Mangles, and the two sailors, mounted their
horses.]

"I declare!" said Paganel, "this is an admirable vehicle, worth all the
mail-coaches in the world. I know of no better way of traversing the
earth than in this style, like mountebanks. A house that moves when
you please and stops wherever you please is all you can desire."

"Monsieur Paganel," replied Lady Helena, "I hope to have the pleasure
of receiving you in my parlor."

"The most devoted of all," added Paganel, gallantly.

The signal for departure was now given. Lady Helena and Miss Grant
seated themselves in their compartment, Ayrton and Olbinett took their
places respectively in front and in the rear part of the cart, while
Glenarvan, the major, Paganel, Robert, Captain Mangles, and the two
sailors, all armed with carbines and revolvers, mounted their horses. A
"God bless you" was Mr. O'Moore's parting salute, which was echoed in
chorus by his family. Ayrton uttered a peculiar cry, and started his
long team. The cart moved, the timbers cracked, the axles creaked, and
the farm of the honest hospitable Irishman soon disappeared from view
at the turn of the road.

Our travelers made tolerably good progress by their new mode of
conveyance. The heat was great, but endurable, and the road was
quite easy for the horses. They were still in the province of South
Australia, and in this part at least the scenery was not of the
most interesting character. A succession of small hills, with very
dusty tracks, small shrubs, and scant herbage, had to be traversed
for several miles; and when these had been passed they reached the
"Mosquito Plains," whose very name describes them, and serves to tell
of the tortures that our friends had to encounter. Both the bipeds and
the quadrupeds suffered terribly from the infliction of these flying
pests, whom to avoid was impossible; but there was some consolation for
the former in the spirits of hartshorn, carried in the medicine-chest,
which alleviated the pain caused by the sting of those whom Paganel was
continually consigning to a place and person whom they would not visit.

This bird was greatly admired, and the major would have won the honors
of the day, if young Robert had not encountered a few miles farther
on, and bravely vanquished, an unsightly beast, half hedgehog, half
ant-eater, a chaotic-looking animal, like those of pre-historic
periods. A long, glutinous, extensible tongue hung out of its mouth,
and fished up the ants that constituted its principal food. Of course,
Paganel wished to carry away the hideous creature, and proposed to
put it in the baggage-room; but Mr. Olbinett opposed this with such
indignation that the geographer gave up his idea of preserving this
curious specimen.

About four o'clock in the afternoon, Captain Mangles descried, three
miles in advance, an enormous column of dust that spread along the
horizon. What occasioned this? It would have been very difficult to
say. Paganel was inclined to regard it as some phenomenon, for which
his lively imagination already sought a natural cause. But Ayrton
dissipated all his conjectures by declaring that this cloud of dust
proceeded from a drove of cattle.

The horsemen surrounded the heavy vehicle, and the party boldly entered
the river. Usually, when these fordings are attempted, the carts are
encircled by a ring of empty barrels, which support them on the water.
But here this buoyant girdle was wanting, and it was, therefore,
necessary to confide to the sagacity of the oxen, guided by the
cautious Ayrton. The major and the two sailors dashed through the rapid
current some distance ahead, while Glenarvan and Captain Mangles, one
on each side of the cart, stood ready to assist the ladies, and Paganel
and Robert brought up the rear.

"Monsieur Paganel," said Lady Helena, "you have never given us the
history that you promised when you supplied us with that long list of
names."

The histories of these Australian travels were lengthy, as told by
Paganel. When he had finished, hope and despair seemed to fight for the
mastery in the breasts of his listeners; but they did not fight long,
for peaceful slumbers soon enwrapped the company, except those whose
turn it was to watch over their fellow-travelers.

At eleven o'clock they arrived at Carlsbrook, quite an important
municipality. Ayrton thought it best to pass by the city without
entering. Glenarvan was of the same opinion; but Paganel, always
eager for something new, desired to visit the place. Accordingly,
the geographer, taking Robert with him as usual, started on his
explorations, while the cart slowly continued its journey. Their
inspection of the town was very rapid, and shortly afterwards they had
joined their companions.

While they were passing through this region, the travelers requested
Paganel to give them some account of its progress, and the geographer,
in compliance with their wishes, had just begun a lecture upon the
civilization of the country, when he was interrupted by a shrill
whistle. The party were not a mile from the railroad. A locomotive,
coming from the south, and going slowly, had stopped just where
the road they were following crossed the iron track. At this point
the railway passes over the Lutton on an iron bridge, and thither
Ayrton directed his cart, preceded by the horsemen. The travelers
were attracted, moreover, by a lively feeling of curiosity, for
a considerable crowd was already rushing towards the bridge. The
inhabitants of the neighboring stations, leaving their houses, and the
shepherds their flocks, lined the sides of the track. Frequent cries
were heard. Some serious event must have taken place to cause such
excitement,--a great accident, perhaps.

Glenarvan, Paganel, the major, and Captain Mangles mingled with the
crowd, and listened to the conjectures that passed from one to another.
Each sought to explain the catastrophe, while laboring to save what was
left.

"What! convicts?" cried Paganel, who recognized the phrase employed in
the Australian colonies.

They had not proceeded far before they reached a native cemetery,
pleasantly situated and with abundance of shady trees. Here for a
time they halted, and, whilst Robert and Paganel were exploring, Lord
and Lady Glenarvan almost stumbled over a queer object. It was human,
indigenous, and sleeping; but at first this was all that they could
decide, until, as the eyes opened and the sleeper roused to active
life, they saw before them a boy of eight years, with a notice pinned
to the back of his jacket which read as follows: "TOLINÉ*, to be
conducted to Echuca, care of Jeff Smith, Railway Porter. Prepaid."

[Illustration: Paganel and the others had now gathered round, and
Toliné had to answer many a question. He came out of his examination
very creditably.]

Paganel and the others had now gathered round, and Toliné had to answer
many a question. He came out of his examination very creditably; the
reverence with which he spoke of the Creator and of the Bible produced
a very favorable impression on the Scottish heads of the expedition,
whilst the fact that he had taken "the first prize in geography" was
sufficient introduction to Monsieur Paganel, who forthwith tested his
knowledge, greatly to his own satisfaction, and considerably to the
credit of his young pupil. The curiosity of his discoverers having been
fully satisfied, Toliné was made welcome, and partook with the others
of the general repast. Many were the plans and purposes concerning
him, and much wonder was expressed as to how they could speed him on
his way; but in the morning it was discovered that he had solved the
problem for himself, and a bouquet of fresh leaves and flowers, laid by
the side of Lady Helena's seat, was the only memento that Toliné had
left.

Thus, in this strange gathering of all nationalities and creeds and
professions, the regular inhabitants beheld a still more extraordinary
sight than that every day afforded them: folks who to the refinement
which education and civilization give added both the earnestness
of the worker and the freshness and vigor of the pleasure-seeking
tourist. In the streets, in connection with the strange sign-boards and
announcements, the novel erections and purposes to which some of them
were adapted, Paganel had a history and commentary for every one.

[Illustration: In the streets, in connection with the strange
sign-boards and announcements, the novel erections and purposes to
which some of them were adapted, Paganel had a history and commentary
for every one.]

But his joy culminated when, after some time spent in the hotel, the
party left the town, and passed through the "diggings," properly so
called. It was difficult to persuade Paganel and Robert--who kept
together--to come on, in order that they might not leave Ayrton and
Mulready too long in suspense. Now the Frenchman would see just the key
that he needed to understand a point not before clear to him; anon you
might see him as in the illustration, when he had picked up a pebble
and was sure that it was in itself so interesting as a mineralogical
specimen that he must treasure it up for the Bank of France, so that
his own land might have at least one part of Australia. All this was
done with such a mingling of childish good-nature and scientific and
national pride that it was useless to do anything but laugh, and an
irrepressible smile came over even the major's features. At length,
however, by drawing him into a lecture, they succeeded in persuading
him to follow them; and, as they left the diggings, he told them the
history of the prophecies, the discovery, and the spread of knowledge
as to the rich auriferous deposits of this part of Australia. He
could give them facts and incidents and dates as to the ingress into
Melbourne, and the exodus therefrom to the diggings, in the year 1852;
he told them how the energy and the love of order which characterize
the English-speaking peoples had reduced to system, method,
subordination, the chaotic surgings and restlessness which marked the
first weeks and months of this new era; and he detailed, as though
he had studied the subject to the entire neglect of other matters,
the working of the system,--how the land was registered, what was the
sum paid in the aggregate, how the taxes were collected, wherein the
system had been found faulty. All this occupied much time, and, before
he had finished, the cart was in sight, in which Lady Helena and Miss
Grant reseated themselves, and for the remainder of the day and the
succeeding night their progress was in the accustomed order.

At sunrise the travelers left the gold regions and crossed the
frontiers of the county of Talbot. Their line of travel now struck
the dusty roads of the county of Dalhousie. Half the journey was
accomplished. In fifteen days more of travel equally rapid the little
party would reach the shores of Twofold Bay. Moreover, every one was in
good health. Paganel's assertions as to the salubrity of this climate
were verified. There was little or no moisture, and the heat was quite
endurable. Neither men nor animals complained.

Every one observed this and seemed surprised. Why this particular
arrangement? This question was naturally addressed to Paganel, who
replied like a man who is never at fault.

"Just so, my dear Paganel," replied Glenarvan; "and now tell us why the
leaves grow thus."

"In this country, where the air is dry," said Paganel, "where rains
are rare and the soil is parched, the trees need neither wind nor
sun. Hence these narrow leaves seek to defend themselves against the
elements and preserve themselves from too great an evaporation. They
therefore present their edges, and not their faces, to the action of
the solar rays. There is nothing more intelligent than a leaf."

The entire party was inclined to be of MacNabb's opinion, except
Paganel, who, as he wiped his face, congratulated himself upon
traveling beneath these shadowless trees. However, this arrangement of
foliage was to be regretted; for the journey through these forests is
frequently very long and painful, since nothing protects the traveler
from the heat of the sun.

Olbinett, according to Paganel's advice, kindled a fire in one of these
tubular trunks. He obtained a draught at once, and the smoke soon
disappeared in the dark mass of foliage. The necessary precautions were
taken for the night, and Ayrton, Mulready, Wilson, and Captain Mangles
watched by turns till sunrise.

"Seymour!" cried Paganel. "This is the last place we shall meet with
before leaving the province of Victoria."

It was now nine o'clock. The moon was approaching the horizon, and her
rays were dimmed by the gathering mist. The darkness was increasing.
The whole party, accordingly, entered the broad street of Seymour under
the guidance of Paganel, who always seemed to be perfectly acquainted
with what he had never seen. But his instinct directed him, and he went
straight to Campbell's North British Hotel. Horses and oxen were taken
to the stable, the cart was put under the shed, and the travelers were
conducted to quite comfortable apartments.

At ten o'clock the guests took their seats at a table, over which
Olbinett had cast his experienced eye. Paganel had just explored the
town, in company with Robert, and now related his nocturnal impressions
in a very laconic style. He had seen absolutely nothing.

However, a man less absent-minded would have observed a certain
excitement in the streets of Seymour. Groups were formed here and
there, which gradually increased. People talked at the doors of the
houses, and questioned each other with an air of anxiety. Various daily
papers were read aloud, commented upon, and discussed. These signs,
one might suppose, could not have escaped the most careless observer;
Paganel, however, had suspected nothing.

"You see, Paganel, that there may yet be convicts in Australia."

"Runaways there may be, of course," replied Paganel, "but not those
who have been transported and regularly received. These people have no
right to be here."

"Well said," replied Paganel. "By continuing our course we shall cross
Captain Grant's track, while by returning to the south we should go
directly away from it. I agree with you, therefore, and shall give
myself no uneasiness about the runaway convicts."

Paganel, who was in his element wherever statistics or history was
concerned, went into full details respecting the native races. He gave
a long account of the cruelties to which these unfortunate beings
had been subjected at the hands of the early colonists, and showed
how little had been done by the interference of the government. As
a striking instance of the manner in which the aborigines melt away
before the advance of civilization, he cited the case of Tasmania,
which at the beginning of this century had five thousand native
inhabitants, but in 1863 had only seven.

"That monkey," answered Paganel, "is a full-blooded Australian."

Paganel, to whom fell the first watch, did not lie down, but, rifle on
shoulder, guarded the encampment, walking to and fro that he might the
better resist sleep. In spite of the absence of the moon, the night was
almost bright with the splendor of the southern constellations; and the
geographer amused himself in reading the great book of the firmament,
which is always open. The silence of sleeping nature was broken only
by the sound of the horses' chains as they rattled against their feet.
Paganel was becoming fully absorbed in his astronomical meditations,
and occupying himself more with the things of heaven than those of
earth, when a distant sound startled him from his reverie.

It was indeed very surprising, and Paganel began to think that some
strange Australian bird was imitating the sound of the instrument.

[Illustration: Paganel did not lie down, but, rifle on shoulder,
guarded the encampment, walking to and fro that he might the better
resist sleep.]

When Wilson came to relieve the geographer, he found him wrapt in a
profound reverie. Paganel said nothing to the sailor, but, reserving
his account of the incident for Glenarvan the next day, he crept into
the tent.

Paganel was just about to relate his experiences of the past night,
when two men appeared, in hunting costume, mounted on fine horses. They
naturally stopped at sight of the little party, encamped in gypsy-like
fashion, and seemed to be wondering what the presence of armed men in
this place meant, when they perceived the ladies, who were alighting
from the cart.

"Sir," said Paganel, addressing Michael Patterson, "should I be too
inquisitive were I to ask if it was you who sang that divine air of
Mozart last night?"

"Well, sir," continued Paganel, extending his hand, "accept the sincere
compliments of a Frenchman, who is an ardent admirer of Mozart's music."

"The Australians are not cruel, madam," replied the young settler:
"Miss Grant may reassure herself on this point. There are many
instances of their kindness; and some Europeans have lived a long time
among them, without having any reason to complain of brutality." These
words corroborated the information previously given by Paganel and
Ayrton.

At eleven o'clock tea was served in true English style. Paganel
having desired to taste the Australian tea, a liquid, black as ink,
was brought to him. It consisted of a quart of water, in which half
a pound of tea had been boiled four hours. Paganel, with a wry face,
pronounced it excellent. At midnight the guests were conducted to cool
and comfortable chambers, where they renewed in dreams the pleasures of
the day.

"You will change your opinion, my dear Glenarvan," replied Paganel.
"You must not think you are in Switzerland."

"Are miniature mountains," continued Paganel. "You will cross them
without noticing it."

"Well!" said Paganel, as they reached the hostelry, "the proprietor of
this inn cannot make a great fortune in such a place. Of what use can
he be?"

The next day they began the descent, which was much more rapid. During
its course a violent hail-storm burst on them, and they were forced to
seek a shelter beneath the rocks. Not hailstones, but pieces of ice as
large as one's hand, were precipitated from the angry clouds. A sling
could not have hurled them with greater force, and several sharp blows
warned Paganel and Robert to be on their guard. The cart was pierced
through in many places: indeed, few roofs could have resisted the fall
of these cutting missiles, some of which froze to the trunks of the
trees. It was necessary to wait for the end of this avalanche, for fear
of being stoned to death, and it was an hour before the party regained
the steep path, still slippery with icy incrustations. At evening the
cart, considerably shattered, but still firm on its wooden wheels,
descended the last slopes of the Alps, between tall solitary pines, and
reached the plains of Gippsland.

This advice of the quartermaster seemed reasonable. Paganel seconded
it. He thought, too, that the yacht would be very useful under the
present circumstances, and added that they could no longer communicate
with Melbourne after passing the Lucknow road.

Early in the afternoon they passed through a curious forest of ferns.
These arborescent plants, in full bloom, measured thirty feet in
height. Horses and horsemen could easily pass beneath their drooping
branches, and sometimes the rowel of a spur would ring, as it struck
against their solid stalks. The coolness of the grove was very grateful
to the wearied travelers. Paganel, always demonstrative, gave vent to
exclamations of delight that startled flocks of parrots and cockatoos.

"Paganel! Paganel! what is the matter?" cried Lord Glenarvan.

"The matter is, my dear friend," replied Paganel, extricating himself
from the stirrups, "that I no longer have a horse."

At once Glenarvan, Captain Mangles, and Wilson examined the animal.
Paganel was right. His horse had been suddenly stricken dead.

The major, who was not selfish, was about to waken Paganel, that the
geographer might witness the spectacle with his own eyes, when an
unexpected sight stopped him.

Ayrton took charge of the ox, and Mulready of the horse, and the party
returned along the winding banks of the river. Half an hour after,
Paganel, MacNabb, Lady Helena, and Miss Grant were told the state of
affairs.

"Perhaps he thinks he is in league with these convicts?" remarked
Paganel, imprudently.

"Monsieur Paganel is mistaken," said Captain Mangles quickly: "he knows
that there are no convicts in the province of Victoria."

"Yes, yes, that is so," eagerly replied Paganel, who would fain have
retracted his words. "What could I have been thinking of? Convicts? Who
ever heard of convicts in Australia? Moreover, as soon as they land,
they make very honest people. The climate, you know, Miss Mary, the
moral effect of the climate----"

"I deserve to be transported myself," said Paganel piteously.

The first question was to determine the exact position of the
encampment. Paganel was charged with this duty, and fulfilled it with
his customary precision.

"Without doubt," replied Paganel. "Eden is not a new municipality; and
its harbor must have frequent communication with Melbourne. I even
believe that thirty-five miles from here, at the parish of Delegete, we
can obtain provisions and the means of conveyance."

"That is quite true," added Paganel.

Ayrton's tone was that of a man who is thoroughly acquainted with his
subject. Paganel, towards whom questioning glances were turned, nodded
approvingly at the words of the quartermaster.

"Good for the son of Captain Grant!" replied Paganel.

This answer was rather unexpected; for hitherto MacNabb had always
opposed Ayrton's ideas on this subject. Ayrton, too, was surprised,
and cast a quick glance at the major. Paganel, Lady Helena, and the
sailors had been favorably disposed to the quartermaster's project, and
no longer hesitated after MacNabb's declaration. Glenarvan, therefore,
announced that Ayrton's plan was adopted.

Wilson, Mulready, Captain Mangles, Paganel, and Robert offered
themselves immediately. The captain particularly insisted that this
mission should be confided to him; but Ayrton, who had not yet
finished, resumed the conversation, and said:

The captain, the major, Paganel, and the sailors then seized their
rifles, and stood ready to repel the convicts. Glenarvan and Robert had
joined the ladies, while Olbinett hastened to the common defence.

"Then they were silent," added MacNabb, "and departed. I wanted to know
more: I followed them. The conversation soon began again. 'A cunning
man, this Ben Joyce,' said the farrier; 'a famous quartermaster, with
his invented shipwreck. If his plan succeeds, it will be a stroke of
fortune. Devilish Ayrton! Call him Ben Joyce, for he has well earned
his name.' These rascals then left the wood of gum-trees. I knew what
I wished, and returned to the encampment with the certainty that all
the convicts in Australia are not reformed, in spite of Paganel's
arguments."

For the second time an erroneous interpretation of the document had set
the searchers of the Britannia on a false trail. All, in the face of
this situation and the grief of the two children, preserved a mournful
silence. Who then could have found words of hope? Robert wept in his
sister's arms. Paganel murmured, in a voice of despair,--

At this moment Captain Mangles, the major, and Paganel joined
Glenarvan. They had been to examine the Snowy. The waters, swollen by
the recent rains, had risen a foot above low-water mark, and formed
an impetuous current. It was impossible to venture upon this roaring
deluge, these rushing floods, broken into a thousand eddies by the
depressions of the river-bed. Captain Mangles declared that the passage
was impracticable.

"Before Glenarvan speaks," said Paganel, "I must make a remark. It is
well that one of us should go to Melbourne, but not that these dangers
should be incurred by Captain Mangles. He is the captain of the Duncan,
and must not, therefore, expose himself. Allow me to go in his place."

"Well said," replied the major; "but why should it be you, Paganel?"

"My friends," said Glenarvan, "if one of us is to go to Melbourne, let
fate decide. Paganel, write our names----"

"Glenarvan," interposed Paganel, "you cannot leave the encampment."

"There are dangers to incur," replied Glenarvan; "and I will not leave
my part to others. Write, Paganel; let my name be mingled with those of
my companions, and Heaven grant that it may be the first drawn."

While Wilson was occupied with these arrangements, Glenarvan was
preparing the letter designed for Tom Austin; but his wounded arm
disabled him, and he asked Paganel to write for him. The geographer,
who seemed absorbed in one idea, was oblivious to what was passing
around him. It must be confessed that Paganel, in all this succession
of sad misfortunes, thought only of his false interpretation of the
document. He turned the words about in every way to draw from them a
new meaning, and remained wrapt in these meditations. Thus he did not
hear Glenarvan's request, and the latter was forced to repeat it.

"Very well," replied Paganel; "I am ready."

Paganel had just finished this last word when his eyes fell upon the
number of the _Australian and New Zealand Gazette_ that lay upon the
ground. The paper, being folded, only allowed him to see the two last
syllables of its title. His pencil stopped, and he seemed to completely
forget Glenarvan and his letter.

"Nothing! nothing!" replied Paganel. Then, in a lower tone, he
repeated: "Aland! aland! aland!"

He had risen; he had seized the paper. He shook it, seeking to
repress words ready to escape his lips. Lady Helena, Mary, Robert,
and Glenarvan gazed at him without understanding this inexplicable
agitation. Paganel was like a man whom a sudden frenzy has seized. But
this state of nervous excitation did not last. He gradually grew calm.
The joy that gleamed in his eyes died away, and, resuming his place, he
said, in a quiet tone:

"Australia?" cried Paganel. "Ah, yes, Australia!"

The letter was now finished, and presented to Glenarvan for his
signature, who, although affected by his recent wound, acquitted
himself as well as possible of this formality. The note was then
folded and sealed, while Paganel, with a hand that still trembled from
excitement, wrote the following address:

Paganel had regained his coolness and accustomed manners. His look
still indicated an uneasy state of mind, but he appeared decided to
keep his secret. He had doubtless strong reasons for acting thus,
for the major overheard him repeating these words, like a man who is
struggling with himself:

The travelers, after Mulready's departure, ensconced themselves in the
cart. Lady Helena, Mary Grant, Glenarvan, and Paganel occupied the
front compartment, which had been made water-tight. In the rear part
Olbinett, Wilson, and Robert had found a sufficient shelter, while the
major and Captain Mangles were on guard without. This precaution was
necessary, for an attack by the convicts was easy and possible.

On arriving at the cart, Paganel, Robert, Wilson, and Olbinett came
out, and Lady Helena gave up her room to the poor sailor. The major
took off Mulready's vest, wet with blood and rain. He discovered the
wound. It was a poniard stab, which the unfortunate had received in his
right side.

Captain Mangles, Paganel, and Glenarvan took a tour of exploration
around the camp. They traversed the path still marked with blood, but
found no trace of Ben Joyce or his band. They went to the place where
the attack had been made. Here two corpses lay on the ground, shot
by Mulready. One was the farrier of Black Point. His face, which had
mortified, was a horrible sight.

"This is the only feasible plan," replied Paganel.

On leaving the encampment, Mulready had followed one of the paths
indicated by Paganel. He hastened, as much at least as the darkness of
the night permitted him. According to his estimate, he had traveled a
distance of about two miles, when several men--five, he thought--sprang
to his horse's head. The animal reared. Mulready seized his revolver
and fired. He thought that two of his assailants fell. By the flash of
the report, he recognized Ben Joyce, but that was all. He had not time
to fully discharge his weapon. A violent blow was struck upon his right
side, which brought him to the ground. However, he had not yet lost
consciousness. The assassins believed him dead. He felt them search
him. Then a conversation ensued. "I have the letter," said one of them.
"Give it to me," replied Ben Joyce; "and now the Duncan is ours!"

"Well, we must reach the coast before these wretches," said Paganel.

"I will accompany you, captain," replied Paganel.

This proposal was accepted, and the captain and Paganel prepared to
start immediately. They were to follow along the bank of the river till
they came to the place indicated by Ben Joyce, and keep out of sight
of the convicts, who were probably lying in wait. These two courageous
men accordingly, well furnished with arms and provisions, set out, and
soon disappeared among the tall rushes of the river.

"They burned it after their passage," replied Paganel.

However, this state of things could not last long. Indeed, on the
morning of the third day, Paganel perceived that the waters were
beginning to subside. He reported to Glenarvan the result of his
observations.

"Yes," said Paganel, "and in that town we shall find rapid means of
conveyance. Who knows whether we shall not arrive in time to prevent
this calamity?"

Each took his place on the raft, which was moored to the bank. Captain
Mangles had arranged on the starboard side, and confided to Wilson, a
kind of oar to sustain the raft against the current, and prevent its
drifting. As for himself, he stood at the stern, and steered by means
of a clumsy rudder. Lady Helena and Mary Grant occupied the centre
of the raft near Mulready. Glenarvan, the major, Paganel, and Robert
surrounded them, ready to lend assistance.

Glenarvan, Captain Mangles, and Paganel alighted immediately, and
hastened to the custom-house. Here they questioned the employees, and
consulted the latest arrivals. No vessel had entered the bay for a week.

In this state of affairs, what was to be done? Wait for a ship? They
might be delayed a long time, for Twofold Bay is little frequented.
After some deliberation, Glenarvan was about to decide upon reaching
Sydney by the coast, when Paganel made a proposal that was unexpected
to every one.

The geographer had just returned from Twofold Bay. He knew that there
were no means of transportation to Sydney or Melbourne; but, of the
three vessels anchored in the roadstead, one was preparing to start
for Auckland, the capital of Ika-na-Maoui, the northern island of New
Zealand. Thither Paganel proposed to go by the bark in question, and
from Auckland it would be easy to return to England by the steamers of
the English company.

This proposition was taken into serious consideration, although Paganel
did not enter into those extended arguments of which he was usually so
lavish. He confined himself to stating the fact, and added that the
voyage would not last more than five or six days.

Captain Mangles advocated Paganel's plan. He thought it should be
adopted, since they could not wait for the uncertain arrival of other
vessels. But, before deciding, he judged it advisable to visit the ship
in question. Accordingly, he, with Glenarvan, the major, Paganel, and
Robert, took a boat, and pulled out to where it was anchored.

Thereupon Glenarvan, the major, Robert, Paganel, and Captain Mangles
left the vessel, without Will Halley's having so much as touched the
brim of his hat.

"Well, I like him," replied Paganel. "He is a real sea-wolf."

In the mean time the major discounted at a money-changer's some drafts
that Glenarvan had on the Union Bank of Melbourne. As for Paganel, he
procured an excellent map of New Zealand.

Paganel was a prey to a feverish agitation. Captain Mangles, who had
watched him since the incident at Snowy River, many times pressed him
with questions which Paganel did not answer. But that evening, as he
went with him to his chamber, the captain asked him why he was so
nervous.

"My friend," replied Paganel evasively, "I am no more nervous than
usual."

"Mr. Paganel, you have a secret that troubles you."

That evening conversation very naturally turned upon the land to which
they were now sailing, its discovery and colonization; and just as
naturally all turned to Paganel as to a bookcase, for some information
thereon. It was very readily accessible, although evidently to the
geographer's mind there was something of a painful character connected
with the name, the impression, and the very thoughts of New Zealand and
its Maori inhabitants.

"Monsieur Paganel," said Lady Helena, "have your friends, the English,
been the only ones to search out this island?"

Of course he did not forget to mention that a French navigator,
Surville by name, was the next to visit the shores, and that his
visit likewise was the cause of bloodshed and misery. But he gave
them a more lengthy and extended narrative of Captain Cook's voyages,
which were the most important in their results as well as the most
interesting and tragic in many of their incidents. It was on the 6th
of October, 1769, that this navigator first landed on the shores which
he visited twice afterwards, and each time added greatly to the stock
of previous knowledge concerning these islands, their productions, and
their inhabitants. By him it was first ascertained that cannibalism was
practiced by some, if not all, of the tribes at that time; and it was
very evident, from the manner of Paganel's narration, that hereabout
lay the extremely sensitive point of the worthy geographer's fears and
forebodings. However, he was not deterred from rehearsing how one and
another not merely visited, but began to settle, on the island, so that
in the treaty of 1814 it was formally recognized as belonging to Great
Britain, and twenty years after was important enough to have a separate
official and governmental establishment.

Paganel also told, at great length, the tales of many of the sad
incidents which from time to time have marked even the commercial
intercourse between the European and the Maori; as, for instance, the
sad tale of conflict and bloodshed connected with the death of Captain
Marion, a French navigator, in 1772. He had landed near the spot where
Surville had ill-treated some of the natives and traitorously seized
a son of the chief, Takouri, who yet appeared to welcome this next
French visitant, though remembering none the less the terrible duty of
vengeance which is felt by the Maori to be so binding.

But neither Lady Helena nor Mary Grant complained, although the
continual rain kept them confined, and the want of air and rolling of
the ship seriously incommoded them. Their friends sought to divert
them, and Paganel strove to while the time with his stories, but did
not succeed so well as previously.

"Have they fallen into the sea?" asked Paganel.

"Let us avoid the coast," added Paganel. "We must beware of New
Zealand."

His improvised sailors were ready. He ordered them to reef the sails.
The major, Robert, and Paganel, under Wilson's direction, climbed
the maintop. The top-sail, swelled by the wind, would have prevented
the extrication of the ship, and it was necessary to reef it, which
was done as well as possible. At last, after much labor, severe to
unaccustomed hands, the maintop-gallant was taken down. Young Robert,
nimble as a cat, and bold as a cabin-boy, had rendered important
services in this difficult operation.

This labor was half accomplished when the sun neared the meridian.
The captain left Glenarvan to follow out his instructions, and turned
his attention to determining his position, which was very important.
Fortunately, he had found in Will Halley's cabin a Nautical Almanac and
a sextant, with which he was able to take an observation. By consulting
the map Paganel had bought at Eden, he saw that they had been wrecked
at the mouth of Aotea Bay, above Cahua Point, on the shores of the
province of Auckland. As the city was on the thirty-seventh parallel,
the Macquarie had been carried a considerable distance out of her
course. It was, therefore, necessary to sail northward to reach the
capital of New Zealand.

"What is nothing at sea will be long and difficult on land," replied
Paganel.

The great anchor now remained. They lowered it with difficulty,
transported it on the raft, and soon it was moored behind the other;
the captain and his men returning to the vessel, and waiting for high
water, which would be early in the morning. It was now six o'clock
in the evening. The young captain complimented his sailors, and told
Paganel that, with the aid of courage and good discipline, he might one
day become quartermaster.

These reasons were decisive. Glenarvan and Paganel, the most impatient
on board, yielded, and the work was suspended.

Glenarvan, Mulready, and Robert on one side, and Paganel, the major,
and Olbinett on the other, bore down upon the handles that moved the
machine. At the same time the captain and Wilson added their efforts to
those of their companions.

In the evening, after supper, while Lady Helena and Mary Grant were
reposing in their berths, Paganel and his friends conversed seriously
as they paced the deck. The geographer had asked Captain Mangles
whether the raft could not follow the coast as far as Auckland, instead
of landing the passengers at once. The captain replied that it would be
impossible with such a rude craft.

"So much the worse for them," continued Paganel; "and for us, too, as
this boat would have been useful."

"What do you mean, Paganel?" said Glenarvan. "The raft will take us
ashore."

"My friends," resumed Paganel, "I do not doubt your courage, nor that
of our fair companions. Twenty miles is nothing in any other country
except New Zealand. Here, however, anything is better than venturing
upon these treacherous shores."

"It is not a question of wretches," rejoined Paganel. "The New
Zealanders form terrible tribes that struggle against the English
government, fight with invaders, frequently conquer them, and always
eat them."

"Never fear, my boy!" said Glenarvan; "our friend Paganel exaggerates."

"I do not exaggerate," replied Paganel. "With these New Zealanders war
is what the sports of the chase are to civilized nations; and the game
they hunt for they feast upon."

"Paganel," said the major, "this may be all very true, but have you
forgotten the introduction of Christianity? has it not destroyed these
anthropophagous habits?"

But Paganel was on this point a pessimist, contrary to his usual
characteristic.

What Paganel had stated was indisputable. The cruelty of the New
Zealanders could not be doubted. There was, therefore, danger in
landing. But if the danger had been a hundred times greater, it must
have been faced. Captain Mangles felt the necessity of leaving this
vessel, which would soon break up. Between two perils, one certain, the
other only probable, there was no possible hesitation.

Paganel soon observed that all the sand-bars had disappeared.

"That is true," answered Paganel. "Let us try to determine its
position, that we may not run upon it when the tide covers it."

They approached nearer; but, strange to say, the black point still
rose above the water. The captain gazed at it attentively, and, to see
better, employed Paganel's telescope.

"I am sorry," said Paganel, "for the yawl might have taken us to
Auckland."

"We must be resigned, Mr. Paganel," rejoined the captain. "Moreover, on
such a rough sea, I prefer our raft to that frail conveyance. A slight
shock would dash it in pieces! Therefore, my lord, we have nothing more
to stay here for."

Paganel, as usual, upon being appealed to, could tell them of the
rise, extension, and consolidation of the British power upon the
island; he informed them of the beginnings--and, to his belief, of
the causes--of the strife which for years decimated the aborigines,
and was very injurious to the colonists who had emigrated; then, in
reply to Robert's questions, he went on to speak of those who on a
narrower theatre had emulated by their heroism and patience the deeds
of the world's great travelers and scientific explorers. He told them
of Witcombe and Charlton Howitt, men known in their own circles and
in connection with their own branch of the New Zealand government.
At still greater length he detailed the adventures of Jacob Louper,
who was the companion of Witcombe, and had gone as his assistant
to discover a practicable route over the mountains in the north of
the province of Canterbury. In those mountain wilds, which even the
islanders rarely traverse, these two Europeans suffered greatly, but
still worse was their fate when they descended to the water-level and
essayed to cross the Taramakau near its mouth. Jacob Louper at length
found two old and almost useless canoes, and by attaching the one to
the other they hoped to accomplish the passage safely. Before they
had reached the middle of the rapid current, however, both the tubs
capsized. Louper, with difficulty, managed to support himself on one
of them, and by clinging to it was at length carried to the river's
bank, which his companion also reached; but when after a period of
insensibility Louper returned to consciousness and found the body of
Witcombe, it was lifeless. Though terribly bruised and still bleeding
from his wounds, Louper hollowed a grave for the remains, and then,
after many more days of privation and danger, came to the huts of some
of the Maoris, by whose assistance he at length reached the settled
parts of the colony.

These facts and reminiscences, it must be confessed, were not of the
most inspiriting character; but they were in the same key as most of
Paganel's disquisitions and information concerning these islands, and
they were before a late hour exchanged for peaceful though probably
dreamy slumbers, by his hearers.

By consulting the map, Paganel had calculated that they would have to
travel eight days. But, instead of following the windings of the coast,
he considered it best to proceed to the village of Ngarnavahia, at the
junction of the Waikato and Waipa rivers. Here the overland mail-road
passed, and it would thence be easy to reach Drury, and rest, after
their hardships, in a comfortable hotel.

But before they left the shore their attention was drawn to the large
number of seals, of a peculiar appearance and genus, which lay on the
broad sands daily washed by the tidal water. These seals, with their
rounded heads, their upturned look, their expressive eyes, presented an
appearance, almost a physiognomy, that was mild and wellnigh tender,
and served to recall to the traveler's memory the tales about the
sirens of the olden and modern times, who served as the enchantresses
to just such inhospitable shores as that seemed on which they had
themselves been cast. These animals, which are very numerous on the
coast of New Zealand, are hunted and killed for the sake of their
oil and their skins, and Paganel was of course able to tell how much
within the last few years they had been searched for by the traders and
navigators on these seas.

Whilst speaking of these matters, Robert drew Paganel's attention to
some curious amphibious creatures, resembling the seals, but larger,
which were devouring with rapidity the large stones lying on the shore.

Paganel assured them that these sea-elephants were only weighting
themselves preparatory to their descent into the water, and protested
that if they would but wait for a time they might see them descend and
subsequently return when they had unloaded themselves. The first part
of this programme they saw accomplished; but, greatly to Paganel's
grief, Glenarvan would not longer delay the party, and they soon began
to see inland beauties and curiosities of another sort.

Here and there, however, Robert and Paganel would rejoice together
over some choice bush or bird that they had met with. Notable among
the latter was the New Zealand "kiwi," known to naturalists as the
apteryx, and which is becoming very scarce, from the pursuit of its
many enemies. Robert discovered in a nest on the ground a couple of
these birds without tails or wings, but with four toes on the foot, and
a long beak or bill like that of a woodcock, and small white feathers
all over its body. Of this bird there was then an entire absence in the
zoological collections of Europe, and Paganel indulged the hope that he
might be able to be the proud contributor of such a valuable specimen
to the "Jardin" of his own city. For the present, at least, the
realization of his hopes had to be deferred; and at length, after some
days of weariness and continued travel, the party reached the banks
of the Waipa. The country was deserted. There was no sign of natives,
no path that would indicate the presence of man in these regions. The
waters of the river flowed between tall bushes, or glided over sandy
shallows, while the range of vision extended to the hills that inclosed
the valley on the east.

At four o'clock in the afternoon nine miles had been valiantly
accomplished. According to the map, which Paganel continually
consulted, the junction of the Waikato and Waipa could not be more
than five miles distant. The road to Auckland passed this point, and
there they would encamp for the night. As for the fifty miles that
would still separate them from the capital, two or three days would
be sufficient for this, and even eight hours, if they should meet the
mail-coach.

"Yes," replied Paganel; "but, as I hope, for the last time."

"And they endure them heroically," added Captain Mangles. "But, if I am
not mistaken, Mr. Paganel, you have spoken of a village situated at the
junction of the two rivers."

"A hotel!" cried Paganel. "A hotel in a Maori village! There is not
even a tavern. This village is only a collection of native huts;
and, far from seeking shelter there, my advice is to avoid it most
carefully."

"Always your fears, Paganel!" said Glenarvan.

"Here is the Waikato," cried Paganel, "and the road to Auckland runs
along its right bank."

"Eat," said Paganel, "but of biscuits and dried meat, without kindling
a fire. We have arrived here unseen; let us try to go away in the same
manner. Fortunately, this fog will render us invisible."

Meantime the canoe rapidly ascended the river. Paganel, whose
changeable disposition carried him from one extreme to another, had
regained his hopefulness. He believed that the Maoris were sparing them
the fatigue of their journey to the English settlements, and that they
were certain to arrive at their destination. He was, therefore, quite
resigned to his lot, and traced on his map the course of the Waikato
across the plains and valleys of the province. Lady Helena and Mary
Grant, suppressing their terror, conversed in low tones with Glenarvan,
and the most skillful physiognomist could not have detected on their
faces the anxiety of their hearts.

The Waikato River is worshiped by the natives, as Paganel knew, and
English and German naturalists have never ascended beyond its junction
with the Waipa. Whither did Kai-Koumou intend to take his captives?
The geographer could not have guessed if the word "Taupo," frequently
repeated, had not attracted his attention. By consulting his map,
he saw that this name was applied to a celebrated lake in the most
mountainous part of the island, and that from it the Waikato flows.

Paganel, addressing Captain Mangles in French, so as not to be
understood by the savages, asked him how fast the canoe was going. The
captain thought about three miles an hour.

"It is difficult to say," replied Paganel. "At all events, the war
must have reached the province of Taranaki, and probably the troops
are collected beyond the mountains, on the side of the lake where the
habitations of the savages are concentrated."

The next morning Jacques Paganel consulted his map and discovered
on the right bank Mount Taubara, which rises to the height of three
thousand feet. At noon the whole fleet of boats entered Lake Taupo, and
the natives hailed with frantic gestures a shred of cloth that waved in
the wind from the roof of a hut. It was the national flag.

But Paganel was scarcely disposed to enlarge his account of these
wonders, nor were his friends in a mood to listen. They gazed in
silence towards the northeast shore of the lake, whither the canoe was
bringing them.

In the midst of these cries and threats, Lady Helena affected a
calmness that she could not feel in her heart. This courageous woman,
in order that her husband's coolness might not forsake him, heroically
controlled her emotions. Poor Mary Grant felt herself growing weak, and
Captain Mangles supported her, ready to die in her defence. The others
endured this torrent of invectives in various ways, either indifferent
like the major, or increasingly annoyed like Paganel.

Paganel was astounded at this reply, and gazed at Glenarvan in profound
wonder. Kai-Koumou seemed equally surprised.

At this word the crowd fell back before Glenarvan and his companions,
thus temporarily preserved by a supernatural power. A few moments after
they were led back to the temple that served as their prison; but
Robert Grant and Paganel were no longer with them.

What a night he and his companions passed! Who could depict their
anguish, or measure their sufferings? Neither poor Robert nor brave
Paganel had reappeared. But how could they doubt their fate? Were they
not the first victims of the natives' vengeance? All hope had vanished
even from the heart of the major, who did not easily despair. John
Mangles felt himself growing mad at sight of the sad dejection of Mary
Grant, thus separated from her brother. Glenarvan thought of that
terrible request of Lady Helena, who, rather than yield to torture or
slavery, preferred to die by his hand. Could he summon this fearful
courage? As for an escape, that was plainly impossible. Ten warriors,
armed to the teeth, guarded the entrance of the temple.

"Is Paganel below?" inquired Glenarvan.

"Mr. Paganel?" repeated the boy, surprised apparently at the question.

"No, my lord," answered Robert, at a loss to understand the
disappearance of his friend Paganel.

"Let us start," said the major; "there is not a moment to lose.
Wherever Paganel may be, his situation cannot be worse than ours here.
Let us go."

For half an hour the fugitives wandered at a venture. Paganel was not
there to guide them,--Paganel, the object of their fears, whose absence
cast a dark shadow over their happiness. However, they proceeded
towards the east as well as possible, in the face of a magnificent
dawn. They had soon reached an elevation of five hundred feet above
Lake Taupo, and the morning air at this altitude was keen and cold.
Hills and mountains rose one above another in indistinct outlines; but
Glenarvan only wished to conceal himself and his companions. Afterwards
they would see about issuing from this winding labyrinth.

It was Paganel. At his voice all rushed into the tomb, and gazed with
wonder at the worthy geographer. Paganel was found! The common safety
was represented in him. They were going to question him: they wished
to know how and why he was on the top of the mountain; but Glenarvan
checked this unseasonable curiosity.

"The savages," replied Paganel, shrugging his shoulders, "are
individuals whom I supremely despise."

Each followed Paganel, who issued from the tomb. The Maoris were in the
same place, surrounding the foot of the peak, and uttering terrible
cries.

"Cry and howl till you are tired, miserable creatures!" said Paganel.
"I defy you to climb this mountain!"

"And now, my friends," said Paganel, "if these brutes expect us to test
their patience they are mistaken. In two days we shall be beyond the
reach of these rascals."

"I do not know," replied Paganel, "but we will do so all the same."

"Paganel has changed," thought MacNabb.

After the death of Kara-Tété, Paganel had taken advantage, like Robert,
of the confusion of the natives, and escaped from the pah. But less
fortunate than young Grant, he had fallen upon an encampment of Maoris,
who were commanded by a chief of fine form and intelligent appearance,
who was evidently superior to all the warriors of his tribe. This chief
spoke English accurately, and bade him welcome by rubbing his nose
against that of the geographer. Paganel wondered whether he should
consider himself a prisoner; but seeing that he could not take a step
without being graciously accompanied by the chief, he soon knew how
matters stood on this point.

The chief, whose name was "Hihy" (sunbeam), was not a bad man. The
spectacles and telescope gave him a high opinion of Paganel, whom he
attached carefully to his person, not only by his benefits, but by
strong flaxen ropes, especially at night.

Such was Paganel's story. Did he omit designedly any circumstance
of his stay among the natives? More than once his embarrassment led
them to suspect so. However that might be, he received unanimous
congratulations; and as the past was now known, they returned to the
present.

And first he wished to examine this improvised fortress; not to defend
it, for an attack was not to be feared, but that he might find a way of
escaping. The major and the captain, Robert, Paganel, and himself, took
the exact bearings of the mountain. They observed the direction of the
paths, their branches and declivities. A ridge a mile in length united
the Maunganamu to the Wahiti range, and then declined to the plain. Its
narrow and winding summit presented the only practicable route, in case
escape should become possible. If the fugitives could pass this point
unperceived, under cover of the night, perhaps they might succeed in
reaching the deep valleys and outwitting the Maoris.

Glenarvan and his friends, as soon as they ventured on the dangerous
part of the ridge, were saluted with a volley of shots; but only a
few wads, borne by the wind, reached them. They were made of printed
paper. Paganel picked them up out of curiosity, but it was difficult to
decipher them.

Paganel, who had already observed this, called the attention of his
friends to the circumstance. The Maunganamu is only one of those
numerous cones that cover the central portion of the island. The least
mechanical action could provoke the formation of a crater in the clayey
soil.

"MacNabb," said Paganel, "I do not desire to remain on this peak. Let
Heaven show me a way of escape, and I will leave it instantly."

"Now to the tomb!" cried Paganel, gayly. "This is our fortress, our
castle, our dining-room, and our workshop. No one is to disarrange it.
Ladies, permit me to do the honors of this charming dwelling."

All followed the good-natured Paganel. When the savages saw the
fugitives desecrate anew this tabooed sepulchre, they fired numerous
volleys, and uttered yells no less terrible. But fortunately their
bullets could not reach as far as their cries, for they only came
half-way, while their vociferations were lost in empty air.

"Here is a whole arsenal," said Paganel, "of which we will make a
better use than the deceased. It is a good idea of these savages to
carry their weapons to heaven with them."

"But still more useful," said Paganel, "will be the provisions and
water intended for Kara-Tété."

But Paganel solved the difficulty, and advised him to simply bury his
ferns and potatoes in the ground itself, for the heat of the upper
strata was very great. Olbinett, however, narrowly escaped a serious
scalding, for, just as he had dug a hole to put his roots in, a stream
of watery vapor burst forth, and rose to the height of several feet.
The steward started back in terror.

"Close the hole!" cried the major, who, with the aid of the two
sailors, covered the orifice with fragments of pumice-stone, while
Paganel murmured these words:

"So many blessings," added Paganel, in a mirthful tone. "Consider
Kara-Tété's water and provisions, and the fire of the earth! This
mountain is a paradise! I propose that we found a colony here,
cultivate the soil, and settle for the rest of our days. We will
be Robinson Crusoes of Maunganamu. Indeed, I look in vain for any
deficiency on this comfortable peak."

"Well, it was not created yesterday," said Paganel. "It has long
resisted the action of internal fires, and will easily hold out till
our departure."

"So soon!" said Paganel, in a truly piteous tone. "What! are you
thinking already of leaving this delightful place?"

"Exactly," answered Paganel; "if the Maoris will let us pass."

"Then we will employ the great expedients," said Paganel.

"More than I know what to do with," rejoined Paganel, without further
explanation.

"Wait till to-morrow," said Paganel; "and since we cannot deceive the
vigilance of these natives, permit me to give them a dose in my own
way."

Each cast a longing glance towards the surrounding mountains, the deep
valleys, still veiled in mist, and the surface of Lake Taupo, gently
rippling beneath the morning wind. Then all, eager to know Paganel's
new project, gathered around him with questioning looks; while the
geographer at once satisfied the restless curiosity of his companions.

"This is it," replied Paganel. "The superstition of the natives has
made this mountain a place of refuge, and this superstition must help
us to escape. If I succeed in convincing Kai-Koumou that we have become
the victims of our sacrilege, that the wrath of Heaven has fallen upon
us, in short, that we have met a terrible death, do you think that he
will abandon the mountain and return to his village?"

"The death of the sacrilegious, my friends," continued Paganel. "The
avenging flames are under our feet. Let us open a way for them."

"The idea is good," said the major, "and well conceived, Paganel."

"No, my dear Mary," replied Paganel, "they will not do that. The
mountain is tabooed, and if it shall itself devour its profaners the
taboo will be still more rigorous."

"This very evening," answered Paganel, "at the hour of the greatest
darkness."

"Agreed," said MacNabb. "Paganel, you are a man of genius; and although
from habit I am scarcely ever enthusiastic, I will answer for your
success. Ha! these rascals! we shall perform a little miracle for them
that will delay their conversion a good century. May the missionaries
pardon us!"

Paganel's plan was therefore adopted, and really, with the
superstitious notions of the Maoris, it might and ought to succeed.
It only remained to execute it. The idea was good, but in practice
difficult. Might not this volcano consume the audacious ones who should
dig the crater? Could they control and direct this eruption when the
vapors, flames, and lava should be let loose? Would it not engulf
the entire peak in a flood of fire? They were tampering with those
phenomena whose absolute control is reserved for forces higher than
theirs.

Paganel had foreseen these difficulties, but he expected to act
prudently, and not to venture to extremes. An illusion was enough to
deceive the Maoris, without the awful reality of a large eruption.

Twilight came on. The sun disappeared behind a bank of dense clouds of
threatening aspect. A few flashes illumined the horizon, and a distant
peal of thunder rumbled along the vault of the sky. Paganel welcomed
the storm that came to the aid of his design.

At eight o'clock the summit of the mountain was hidden by a foreboding
darkness, while the sky looked terribly black, as if for a background
to the flaming outbreak that Paganel was about to inaugurate. The
Maoris could no longer see their prisoners. The time for action had
come. Rapidity was necessary, and Glenarvan, Paganel, MacNabb, Robert,
the steward, and the two sailors at once set to work vigorously.

The place for the crater was chosen thirty paces from Kara-Tété's tomb.
It was important that this structure should be spared by the eruption,
for otherwise the taboo would become ineffective. Paganel had observed
an enormous block of stone, around which the vapors seemed to pour
forth with considerable force. This rocky mass covered a small natural
crater in the peak, and only by its weight prevented the escape of the
subterranean flames. If they could succeed in overturning it, the smoke
and lava would immediately issue through the unobstructed opening.

Kai-Koumou came into the midst of his warriors, and Glenarvan
recognized him. The chief advanced to the base of the peak, on the side
spared by the eruption, but did not cross the first slopes. Here, with
outstretched arms, like a sorcerer exorcising, he made a few grimaces,
the meaning of which did not escape the prisoners. As Paganel had
foreseen, Kai-Koumou was invoking upon the mountain a more rigorous
taboo.

A whole day must pass before the decisive attempt could be made, and
they employed their time in arranging a plan of escape. Paganel had
preserved his map of New Zealand, and could therefore search out the
safest routes.

Two hundred feet below the summit, Captain Mangles and his sailor
reached the dangerous ridge that had been so obstinately guarded by the
natives. If, unfortunately, the Maoris, more crafty than the fugitives,
had feigned a retreat to entice them within reach, if they had not
been deceived by the eruption, their presence would be discovered
at this point. Glenarvan, in spite of his confidence and Paganel's
pleasantries, could not help trembling. The safety of his friends was
at stake during the few moments necessary to cross the ridge. He felt
Lady Helena's heart beat as she clung to his arm.

Darkness favored the escape; and making the greatest possible progress,
they left the fatal regions of Lake Taupo. Paganel assumed the guidance
of the little party, and his marvelous instinct as a traveler was
displayed anew during this perilous journey. He managed with surprising
dexterity in the thick gloom, chose unhesitatingly the almost invisible
paths, and kept constantly an undeviating course.

At nine o'clock in the morning they had accomplished a considerable
distance, and could not reasonably require more of the courageous
ladies. Besides, the place seemed suitable for an encampment. The
fugitives had reached the ravine that separates the Kaimanawa and
Wahiti ranges. The road on the right ran southward to Oberland.
Paganel, with his map in his hand, made a turn to the northeast, and
at ten o'clock the little party had reached a sort of steep buttress,
formed by a spur of the mountain.

Not one of the four oarsmen turned to see this unexpected vessel,
for they must not lose a stroke. Only Paganel, rising, directed his
telescope towards the place indicated.

The feelings of Glenarvan and his friends, when the songs of old
Scotland resounded in their ears, it is impossible to describe. As soon
as they set foot on deck the bagpiper struck up a well remembered air,
while hearty hurrahs welcomed the owner's return on board. Glenarvan,
John Mangles, Paganel, Robert, and even the major, wept and embraced
each other. Their emotions rose from joy to ecstasy. The geographer was
fairly wild, skipping about and watching with his inseparable telescope
the canoes returning to shore.

He accordingly repaired to his own cabin. While he was gone, they gazed
at each other in silence, except the major, who, with his eye fixed
upon Paganel, said, as he folded his arms:

"Indeed, I must confess, Paganel, that this is a little too much."

At this moment Austin returned. He held in his hand the letter written
by Paganel, and signed by Glenarvan.

"New Zealand?" cried Paganel, starting.

[Sidenote: PAGANEL IN THE WITNESS-BOX.]

"Well, my good Paganel," said MacNabb, in a grave tone, "it is
fortunate that you did not send the Duncan to Cochin-China."

This sally finished the poor geographer. A fit of laughter seized the
whole crew. Paganel, as if mad, ran to and fro, holding his head in his
hands, and tearing his hair. However, when he had recovered from his
frenzy, there was still another unavoidable question to answer.

"Now, Paganel," said Glenarvan, "be candid. I acknowledge that your
absent-mindedness has been providential. To be sure, without you the
Duncan would have fallen into the hands of the convicts; without you we
should have been recaptured by the Maoris. But do tell me, what strange
association of ideas, what unnatural aberration, induced you to write
New Zealand instead of Australia?"

"Very well," said Paganel. "It was----"

However, leaving Lady Helena, Mary Grant, the major, Paganel, and
Robert to enter the saloon, Glenarvan and Captain Mangles retained Tom
Austin with them. They wished to question him further.

Lady Helena yielded to this request, and Mary Grant and she took their
places beside him, while around them stood the major, Paganel, Captain
Mangles, Robert, Wilson, Mulready, and Olbinett, all who had suffered
so severely by the convict's treason. The crew of the yacht, who did
not yet understand the seriousness of these proceedings, maintained a
profound silence.

It was a sad return for these brave searchers, who had left the shores
of Scotland with such hope and confidence. To the joyous cries that
had saluted Glenarvan on his return succeeded profound dejection. Each
confined himself to the solitude of his cabin, and rarely appeared on
deck. All, even the loquacious Paganel, were mournful and silent. If
Glenarvan spoke of beginning his search again, the geographer shook
his head like a man who has no more hope, for he seemed convinced as
to the fate of the shipwrecked sailors. Yet there was one man on board
who could have informed them about this catastrophe, but whose silence
was still prolonged. There was no doubt that the rascally Ayrton knew,
if not the actual situation of the captain, at least the place of the
shipwreck. Probably Harry Grant, if found, would be a witness against
him; hence he persisted in his silence, and was greatly enraged,
especially towards the sailors who would accuse him of an evil design.

"Yes; but I think that if Major MacNabb and Mr. Paganel were present at
the interview it would be better."

Ayrton spoke calmly. Glenarvan gazed at him steadily, and then sent
word to MacNabb and Paganel, who at once obeyed his summons.

"My lord, it is customary for witnesses to be present at every contract
or negotiation between two parties. That is why I requested the
presence of Mr. Paganel and Major MacNabb; for, properly speaking, this
is a matter of business that I am going to propose to you."

"What are these circumstances?" asked Paganel, quickly.

"I found myself, therefore, abandoned on an almost desert coast, but
only twenty miles from the penitentiary of Perth, the capital of
Western Australia. Wandering along the shore, I met a band of convicts
who had just escaped. I joined them. You will spare me, my lord, the
account of my life for two years and a half. It is enough to know that
I became chief of the runaways, under the name of Ben Joyce. In the
month of September, 1864, I made my appearance at the Irishman's farm,
and was received as a servant under my true name of Ayrton. Here I
waited till an opportunity should be offered to gain possession of a
vessel. This was my great object. Two months later the Duncan arrived.
During your visit at the farm you related, my lord, the whole story of
Captain Grant. I then learned what I had not known, the Britannia's
stoppage at Callao, the last news of her, dated June, 1862, two months
after my abandonment, the finding of the document, the shipwreck of the
vessel, and finally the important reasons you had for seeking Captain
Grant in Australia. I did not hesitate, but resolved to appropriate
the Duncan,--a marvelous ship, that would have distanced the best of
the British navy. However, there were serious injuries to be repaired.
I therefore let her start for Melbourne, and offered myself to you in
my real character of quartermaster, volunteering to guide you to the
scene of the shipwreck, which I falsely located on the eastern coast
of Australia. Thus followed at a distance and sometimes preceded by
my band of convicts, I conducted your party across the province of
Victoria. My companions committed a useless crime at Camden Bridge,
since the Duncan, once at Twofold Bay, could not have escaped me, and
with it I should have been master of the ocean. I brought you thus
unsuspectingly as far as the Snowy River. The horses and oxen fell dead
one by one, poisoned by the gastrolobium. I entangled the cart in the
marshes. At my suggestion----but you know the rest, my lord, and can
be certain that, except for Mr. Paganel's absent-mindedness, I should
now be commander on board the Duncan. Such is my story, gentlemen. My
disclosures, unfortunately, cannot set you on the track of Captain
Grant, and you see that in dealing with me you have made a bad bargain."

"You, Paganel!" he exclaimed; "do you know where Captain Grant is?"

"Hear and judge," replied Paganel. "I did not commit the blunder
that saved us, without reason. Just as I was writing that letter
at Glenarvan's dictation, the word Zealand was troubling my brain.
You remember that we were in the cart. MacNabb had just told Lady
Helena the story of the convicts, and had handed her the copy of the
_Australian and New Zealand Gazette_ that gave an account of the
accident at Camden Bridge. As I was writing, the paper lay on the
ground, folded so that only two syllables of its title could be seen,
and these were _aland_. What a light broke in upon my mind! 'Aland'
was one of the very words in the English document,--a word that we had
hitherto translated _ashore_, but which was the termination of the
proper name Zealand."

"Yes," continued Paganel, with profound conviction, "this
interpretation had escaped me, and do you know why? Because my
examinations were naturally confined more particularly to the French
document, where this important word was wanting."

"Ho! ho!" laughed the major, "that is too much imagination, Paganel.
You forget your previous conclusions rather easily."

"My dear lord," replied Paganel, "I will translate the document for
you, according to my third interpretation, and you shall judge. I only
make two suggestions. First, forget as far as possible the previous
interpretations; and next, although certain passages will seem to you
forced, and I may translate them wrongly, still, remember that they
have no special importance. Moreover, the French document serves as the
basis of my interpretation, and you must consider that it was written
by an Englishman who could not have been perfectly familiar with the
idioms of our language."

So saying, Paganel, slowly pronouncing each syllable, read the
following:

Paganel stopped. His interpretation was admissible. But, although
it appeared as probable as the other, still it might be as false.
Glenarvan and the major therefore no longer attempted to dispute it.
However, since the traces of the Britannia had not been encountered on
the coasts of Patagonia or Australia, the chances were in favor of New
Zealand.

"Now, Paganel," said Glenarvan, "will you tell me why, for about two
months, you kept this interpretation secret?"

Paganel and Captain Mangles consulted the maps on board. Exactly on
the thirty-seventh parallel was an island, generally known by the
name of Maria Theresa, a lone rock in the midst of the Pacific, three
thousand five hundred miles from the American coast, and one thousand
five hundred miles from New Zealand. No ship ever came within hail of
this solitary isle; no tidings from the world ever reached it. Only the
storm-birds rested here during their long flights, and many maps do not
even indicate its position.

"Is that a volcano?" he inquired of Paganel, who, with his telescope,
was examining the land.

"That is scarcely probable," answered Paganel. "Its existence has
been known for several centuries; and this seems a guarantee for its
continuance."

"That would seem to indicate a volcano," said Paganel, watching it
attentively.

"Indeed," observed Paganel, "this volcano glows, but does not
speak. You might say that it throws out intermittent flashes like a
lighthouse."

"Evidently, by savages," replied Paganel.

"At all events, let us beware," added Paganel. "The New Zealanders have
the barbarous custom of misleading ships by moving fires. The natives
of Maria Theresa may understand this deception."

"Upon both!" murmured Paganel. "That is strange!"

Then, leaning forward, after making a sign to keep still, he listened
attentively. The silence was profound everywhere. Paganel called in a
loud voice, but there was no answer.

"It is true!" said Paganel, turning quickly towards Robert.

In a moment this was done; the two children, Glenarvan, Captain
Mangles, and Paganel stepped into it, and six earnest and skilled
oarsmen sped away towards the shore.

How great a debt of gratitude did he feel that he owed this noble woman
and her companions! From Lord Glenarvan down to the lowest sailor,
had not all struggled and suffered for him? Harry Grant expressed
the feelings of thankfulness that overflowed his heart with so much
simplicity and nobleness, and his manly countenance was illumined by so
pure and sincere a sentiment, that all felt themselves repaid for the
trials they had undergone. Even the imperturbable major's eye was wet
with a tear that he could not repress. As for Paganel, he wept like a
child who does not think of hiding his emotion.

The visitors at last reached the house, shaded by verdant gum-trees,
while before its windows stretched the glorious sea, glittering in
the rays of the sun. Harry Grant set his table in the shade, and all
took seats around it. Some cold roast meat, some of the produce of the
breadfruit-tree, several bowls of milk, two or three bunches of wild
chicory, and pure, fresh water, formed the elements of the simple but
healthful repast. Paganel was in ecstasies. It recalled his old idea of
Robinson Crusoe.

But what did Jacques Paganel think during this recital? The worthy
geographer revolved the words of the document a thousand ways in his
brain. He reviewed his three interpretations, which were all false. How
had this island been indicated in these damaged papers? He could no
longer restrain himself, but, seizing Harry Grant's hand, cried:

"Well, captain," said Paganel, "do you remember the exact words of the
document?"

"They are not identical, then?" cried Paganel.

At the word "Tabor," Paganel had suddenly risen, and then, controlling
himself no longer, he cried:

"Certainly, Mr. Paganel," replied Harry Grant; "Maria Theresa on the
English and German, but Tabor on the French maps."

At this moment a vigorous blow descended upon Paganel's shoulder. Truth
compels us to say that it was from the major, who now failed in his
strict habits of propriety.

"No matter?" cried Paganel; "I ought never to have forgotten that
twofold appellation! It is an unpardonable mistake, unworthy of the
secretary of a Geographical Society. I am disgraced!"

A mystery, however, still perplexed MacNabb. Why did Paganel always
keep hermetically incased in his clothes, and wear a comforter over
his ears? The major longed to know the motive for this singular fancy.
But in spite of his questions, hints, and suspicions, Paganel did not
unbutton his coat.

But was Jacques Paganel to die a bachelor? Certainly not; for, after
his heroic exploits, the worthy geographer could not escape celebrity.
His eccentricities (and his abilities) made him much talked of in
Scotland. People seemed as though they could not show him enough
attention.

Just at this time an amiable lady of thirty, none other than the
major's cousin, a little eccentric herself, but still agreeable and
charming, fell in love with the geographer's peculiarities. Paganel was
far from being insensible to Miss Arabella's attractions, yet did not
dare to declare his sentiments. The major accordingly undertook the
part of Cupid's messenger between these two congenial hearts, and even
told Paganel that marriage was "the last blunder" that he could commit.
But the geographer was very much embarrassed, and, strangely enough,
could not summon courage to speak for himself.

"Oh, major, she is charming!" cried Paganel,--"a thousand times too
charming for me; and, if I must tell you, would please me better if she
were less so. I should like to find a defect."

"Be easy," answered the major; "she has more than one. The most perfect
woman always has her share. Well, then, Paganel, are you decided?"

At last, one day, driven desperate by the irrepressible major, Paganel
confessed to him, under the pledge of secrecy, a peculiarity that would
facilitate his identification, if the police should ever be on his
track!

"It is as I tell you," persisted Paganel.

And the major, preserving an imperturbable gravity, left Paganel a prey
to the most acute anxiety.

Jacques Paganel, during his three days' captivity among the Maoris, had
been tattooed from head to foot, and bore on his breast the picture of
an heraldic kiwi with outstretched wings, in the act of biting at his
heart.

This was the only adventure of his great voyage for which Paganel
could never be consoled or pardon the New Zealanders. In spite of the
representations of his friends, he dared not go back to France, for
fear of exposing the whole Geographical Society in his person to the
jests and railleries of the caricaturists.